תָּנוּ רַבָּנָן (רֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה טז ב') שְׁלוֹשָׁה סְפָרִים נִפְתָּחִים בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה אֶחָד שֶׁל צַדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים וְאֶחָד שֶׁל רְשָׁעִים
They taught (the Sages) (Rosh Hashanah 16b): Three books are opened on Rosh Hashanah: one for completely righteous people, one for completely wicked people, and one for those in between.

גְּמוּרִים וְאֶחָד שֶׁלַּבֵּינוֹנִים צַדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים נִכְתָּבִין וְנֶחְתָּמִין לְאַלְתָּר לְחַיִּים רְשָׁעִים גְּמוּרִים נִכְתָּבִין וְנֶחְתָּמִין לְאַלְתָּר לְמִיתָה בֵּינוֹנִים
The completely righteous and one of the intermediate ones are written and sealed immediately for life; the completely wicked are written and sealed immediately for death; the intermediate ones.

תְּלוּיִין וְעוֹמְדִין מֵרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה וְעַד יוֹם הַכִּפּוּרִים זָכוּ נִכְתָּבִין לְחַיִּים לֹא זָכוּ לְמִיתָה זֶה שֶׁאָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים
They are hanging and standing from Rosh Hashanah until Yom Kippur. If they are worthy, they are written for life; if not, they are written for death. This is what the sages said.

בַּצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁנִּכְתָּבִים לְחַיִּים וּרְשָׁעִים לְמִיתָה לֹא צַדִּיקִים שֶׁאֵין לָהֶם עֲוֹנוֹת וְלֹא רְשָׁעִים שֶׁאֵין לָהֶם זְכוּת שֶׁכַּמָּה
In the righteous who are written for life and the wicked for death, not the righteous who have no sins nor the wicked who have no merit, because how much.

צַדִּיקִים מֵתִים לְאַלְתָּר וְכַמָּה רְשָׁעִים מַאֲרִיכִים יָמִים בְּשַׁלְוָה וְהַכָּתוּב (קֹהֶלֶת ח׳:י״ד) צוֹוֵחַ אִם יֵשׁ צַדִּיקִים שֶׁמַּגִּיעַ
The righteous die suddenly, while many wicked people live long lives in peace, and the scripture (Ecclesiastes 8:14) cries out if there are righteous people who deserve it.

אֲלֵיהֶם כְּמַעֲשֵׂה הָרְשָׁעִים וְיֵשׁ רְשָׁעִים שֶׁמַּגִּיעַ אֲלֵיהֶם כְּמַעֲשֵׂה הַצַּדִּיקִים וּכְבָר אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים (אָבוֹת ד) אֵין בְּיָדֵינוּ
To them as the work of the wicked, and there are wicked people who reach them as the work of the righteous, and the sages have already said (Avot 4) "We do not have in our hands."

לֹא שַׁלְוַת רְשָׁעִים וְאַף לֹא יִסּוּרֵי הַצַּדִּיקִים אֶלָּא כָּךְ הַמִּדָּה יֵשׁ עֲוֹנוֹת שֶׁדִּינוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא
Not the tranquility of the wicked nor the sufferings of the righteous, but rather this is the measure: there are sins for which the judgment of the Holy One, blessed be He, applies.

וּמִשְׁפָּטָיו הַצַּדִּיקִים לְהִפָּרַע עֲלֵיהֶם בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְיֵשׁ מֵהֶם שֶׁהַדִּין לְהִפָּרַע בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן בִּזְכוּיוֹת יֵשׁ מֵהֶן
And His righteous judgments are to be exacted in this world, and some of them have the judgment to be exacted in the world to come; and likewise in merits there are some.

שֶׁבַּעַל הַגְּמוּל מְשַׁלֵּם שְׂכָרָן בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְיֵשׁ בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכִשֶׁאָדָם חוֹטֵא כׇּל שָׁעָה וּמִתְלַכְלֵךְ בַּעֲוֹנוֹת וּמִתְטַנֵּף
that the Master of Reward pays their reward in this world and there is in the next world, and when a person sins every hour and becomes soiled in sins and becomes defiled.

בְּחֲטָאִים וּמִתְגַּלְגֵּל בִּפְשָׁעִים וְעוֹשֶׂה גַּם כֵּן צְדָקוֹת וּמַעֲשִׂים טוֹבִים וּבָאִים מַעֲשָׂיו לִפְנֵי אֲדוֹן הַכֹּל שׁוֹקֵל אוֹתָן
In sins and rolling in transgressions and also doing righteousness and good deeds and his deeds come before the Lord of all, who weighs them.

מַעֲשִׂים אֵלּוּ נֶגֶד אֵלּוּ וְהַצַּדִּיק שֶׁהוּא צַדִּיק גָּמוּר זוֹכֶה לַחַיִּים וְכֵן הָרָשָׁע שֶׁדִּינוֹ נוֹתֵן לְשַׁלֵּם לוֹ
These deeds against those, and the righteous one who is a perfect righteous one merits life, and likewise the wicked one whose judgment gives to pay him.

שָׂכָר טוֹב בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה עַל הַמַּעֲשֶׂה הַטּוֹב נִכְתָּב וְנֶחְתָּם לְאַלְתָּר בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה לְחַיִּים כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁפּוֹסְקִים לוֹ
A good reward in this world for the good deed is written and sealed immediately on Rosh Hashanah for life, meaning that they decree it for him.

חַיִּים וְשַׁלְוָה וְעֹשֶׁר וְנִכְסִים וּכְבוֹד וְנִמְצָא זֶה צַדִּיק גָּמוּר בְּדִינוֹ וְהָרָשָׁע שֶׁהוּא רָשָׁע גָּמוּר מִכָּל צַד
Life and peace and wealth and possessions and honor, and it is found that this is a complete righteous one in his judgment, and the wicked one who is a complete wicked one from every side.

נֶחְתַּם לְאַלְתָּר לְמִיתָה וְכֵן בַּעַל מַעֲשֵׂה טוֹב שֶׁנִּכְשַׁל בַּעֲבֵרָה אַחַת בִּלְבַד וְנֶעֱנַשׁ עָלֶיהָ לְמִיתָה נִכְתַּב וְנֶחְתַּם
He was sealed immediately for death, and likewise the owner of a good deed who stumbled in only one transgression and was punished for it with death, was written and sealed.

לְאַלְתָּר לְמִיתָה בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁיָּמוּת בַּשָּׁנָה זֹאת אוֹ שֶׁיִּחְיֶה בְּתַחְלוּאִים רָעִים חַיֵּי צַעַר וְיִסּוּרִין וְנִמְצָא
Immediately to death on Rosh Hashanah, meaning that he will die in this year or live with bad illnesses, lives of sorrow and suffering, and it is found.

זֶה רָשָׁע גָּמוּר בְּדִינוֹ אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁזֶּה צַדִּיק וְזוֹכֶה לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהָרִאשׁוֹן שֶׁזָּכָה לְחַיִּים רָשָׁע
This is a completely wicked person in his judgment, even though this is a righteous person and merits the World to Come, and the first one who merited life is wicked.

גָּמוּר וְאָבוּד לְגַמְרֵי עַד שֶׁיִּהְיֶה גָּדוֹל שֶׁבַּנְּבִיאִים כְּשֶׁנִּדּוֹן עַל חֲטָא אֶחָד קַל וְנֶעֱנָשׁ עָלָיו נִקְרָא בְּכָאן
Finished and completely lost until he will be the greatest of the prophets when he is judged for one small sin and punished for it, he is called here.

רָשָׁע גָּמוּר וְיִהְיֶה אַחְאָב שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בּוֹ (מְלָכִים א כ"א כ"ב)
A complete wicked one and Ahab will be, as it is said about him (1 Kings 21:22).

הָרָאִיתָ כִּי נִכְנַע אַחְאָב מִלְּפָנַי" נִקְרָא בָּזֶה צַדִּיק גָּמוּר וְכֵן זֶה שֶׁאָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה לְחַיִּים
"The one who showed that Ahab had submitted before me is called a complete righteous person, and likewise this one that the sages, may their memory be blessed, said to life."

וְלַמִּיתָה אֵינָם בַּיָּמִים בִּלְבַד אֶלָּא כׇּל הָעֳנָשִׁים שֶׁבָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה נְגָעִים וּמִיתַת בָּנִים וְעֹנִי וְכַיּוֹצֵא בָּהֶן כִּינוּ
And they are not only in days, but all the punishments in this world: plagues, death of children, poverty, and the like, they are called.

אוֹתָם חֲכָמִים בְּשֵׁם "מִיתָה" וְכִנּוּי הַשָּׂכָר הַגְּמוּל הַטּוֹב אָמְרוּהוּ (נְדָרִים סד ב') בִּלְשׁוֹן "חַיִּים".
Those sages, in the name of 'death' and the nickname of the reward, the good recompense, said it (Nedarim 64b) in the language of 'life'.

זֶה הַדִּין שֶׁאָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה שֶׁכׇּל אָדָם נִדּוֹן בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה אֵינוֹ אִם יִזְכֶּה לְגַן עֵדֶן
This is the judgment that the sages, may their memory be blessed, said, that every person is judged on Rosh Hashanah, not whether he will merit the Garden of Eden.

וּלְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אוֹ יִתְחַיֵּב לְגֵיהִנֹּם וְאַבֵּדוֹן שֶׁאֵין אָדָם נִדּוֹן בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה אֶלָּא לְעִנְיְנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה
For the life of the world to come, or he will be held accountable for Gehenna and destruction, that no man is judged on Rosh Hashanah except for the affairs of this world.

אִם רָאוּי לְחַיִּים וּלְשַׁלְוָה אוֹ לְמִיתָה וְיִסּוּרִין כָּךְ אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה (כז א') "זֶה הַיּוֹם"
If one is worthy of life and peace or of death and suffering, so the sages said on Rosh Hashanah (27a) "This is the day."

תְּחִלַּת מַעֲשֶׂיךָ זִכָּרוֹן לְיוֹם רִאשׁוֹן כִּי חֹק לְיִשְׂרָאֵל הוּא מִשְׁפָּט לֶאֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב וְעַל הַמְּדִינוֹת בּוֹ יֹאמַר
The beginning of your works is a memorial of the first day, for it is a law for Israel, a judgment for the God of Jacob, and upon the nations in it he will speak.

אי זו לחרב ואיזו לשלום איזו לרעב ואיזו לשובע ובריות בו יפקדו להזכירם לחיים ולמוות" אלא


כָּךְ הִיא הַמִּדָּה בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה שׁוֹקְלִין מַעֲשָׂיו שֶׁלָּאָדָם וְנִכְתָּב וְנֶחְתָּם לִזְכוּת וּלְחוֹבָה בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּפִי מָה
This is the measure on Rosh Hashanah: one's deeds are weighed, and it is written and sealed for merit or for liability in this world, according to what.

שֶׁמַּגִּיעַ לוֹ בְּחֶלְקוֹ לְפִי מַעֲשָׂיו בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וּכְשֶׁהָאָדָם נִפְטָר לְבֵית עוֹלָמוֹ שׁוֹקְלִין וּפוֹסְקִין עָלָיו חֶלְקוֹ כְּפִי
that which is due to him in his portion according to his deeds in this world, and when a person passes away to his eternal home, they weigh and decide his portion according to ...

הָרָאוּי לוֹ בְּעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת.
The one who is worthy of him in the world of souls.

שָׁנוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (עַל פִּי רֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה טז ב') שָׁלוֹשׁ כִּתּוֹת הֵן לְיוֹם הַדִּין אַחַת
The sages, may their memory be blessed, taught (according to Rosh Hashanah 16b) that there are three groups on the Day of Judgment, one of them.

שֶׁלְּצַדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים וְאַחַת שֶׁלָּרְשָׁעִים גְּמוּרִים וְאַחַת שֶׁלְּבֵינוֹנִים צַדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים נִכְתָּבִין וְנֶחְתָּמִין לְאַלְתָּר לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא רְשָׁעִים
For the completely righteous, one for the completely wicked, and one for the intermediate. The completely righteous are written and sealed immediately for the life of the world to come; the wicked...

גְּמוּרִים נִכְתָּבִים וְנֶחְתָּמִים לְאַלְתָּר לְגֵיהִנֹּם שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְרַבִּים מִיְּשֵׁנֵי עָפָר יָקִיצוּ אֵלֶּה לְחַיֵּי עוֹלָם וְאֵלֶּה לְחֶרְפָּה וּלְדִרְאוֹן עוֹלָם".
Those who are finished are written and sealed immediately to Gehenna, as it is said: "And many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt."

(דָּנִיֵּאל י"ב ב) בֵּינוֹנִים שֶׁעֲוֹנוֹתֵיהֶן וְזַכּוּיוֹתֵיהֶן שְׁקוּלִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא נִקְרָא רַב חֶסֶד וּמַטֶּה כְּלַפֵּי חֶסֶד
Intermediates whose sins and merits are equal, the Holy One, blessed be He, is called 'Abundant in Kindness' and He inclines toward kindness.

וְעֲלֵיהֶם אָמַר דָּוִד "אָהַבְתִּי כִּי יִשְׁמַע ה' אֶת קוֹלִי תַּחֲנוּנָי" וְעֲלֵיהֶם נֶאֱמָרָה אוֹתָהּ הַפָּרָשָׁה כֻּלָּהּ "דַּלּוּתִי"
And about them David said, "I loved because the Lord heard my voice, my supplications," and about them the whole of that passage was said, "my poverty."

וְלִי יְהוֹשִׁיעַ" (תְּהִלִּים קטז) הָיָה בִּכְלַל מַחֲצָה עֲוֹנוֹת שֶׁלָּהֶם פּוֹשְׁעֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּגוּפָן וְהוּא הָרֹאשׁ שֶׁלֹּא הִנִּיחַ
"And to me He will save" (Psalms 116) was in the general half of their sins, the sinners of Israel in their bodies, and he is the head that did not restrain.

תְּפִלִּין מֵעוֹלָם וְהוּא הַדִּין לִשְׁאָר מִצְוֹת עֲשֵׂה שֶׁבְּגוּפָן שֶׁלֹּא קִיְּמוּ מֵעוֹלָם כְּגוֹן שֶׁלֹּא קָרָא קְרִיאַת שְׁמַע
Tefillin from the world and it is the same for other positive commandments in their bodies that they have never kept, such as not reading the Shema.

וְלֹא בֵּרֵךְ עַל הַמָּזוֹן מֵעוֹלָם כֻּלָּן יוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וּמְצַפְצְפִין וְעוֹלִים הֵימֶנָּה וּמִתְרַפְּאִין שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶת הַשְּׁלִישִׁית בָּאֵשׁ".
And if one never blessed over food, all of them descend to Gehenna, and they squeal and rise from it and are healed, as it is said, "And I will bring the third into the fire."

וְעַל-יָהֶם אָמְרָה חַנָּה "ה' מֵמִית וּמְחַיֶּה, מוֹרִיד שְׁאוֹל וְיַעַל" (שְׁמוּאֵל א ב ו) אֲבָל מִי שֶׁעֲוֹנֹתָיו
And on them Hannah said, "The Lord kills and revives, brings down to Sheol and raises up" (1 Samuel 2:6), but whoever sins...

מְרֻבִּים מִזְּכִיּוֹתָיו וּבִכְלַל אוֹתָן הָעֲוֹנוֹת עֲוֹן זֶה הַחָמוּר וְהוּא פּוֹשְׁעֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּגוּפָן וְכֵן פּוֹשְׁעֵי אֻמּוֹת הָעוֹלָם
His sins are many, and among those sins is this grave sin, and it is the transgressions of the people of Israel in their bodies, and also the transgressions of the nations of the world.

בְּגוּפָן וְהֵן בַּעֲלֵי עֲבֵרָה כְּגוֹן עֲרָיוֹת יוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנֹּם וְנִדּוֹנִין בָּהּ שְׁנַיִם עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ לְאַחַר שְׁנַיִם עָשָׂר
In their bodies and they are sinners such as incestuous relationships, they descend to Gehenna and are judged there for twelve months after twelve months.

חֹדֶשׁ גּוּפָן כָּלָה וְנִשְׁמָתָן נִשְׂרֶפֶת וְגֵיהִנּוֹם פּוֹלֶטֶתָן וְרוּחַ מְפַזֶּרֶתָן תַּחַת כַּפּוֹת רַגְלֵי הַצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְעָסוֹתֶם רְשָׁעִים"
When their bodies are consumed and their souls are burned, Gehenna expels them and a wind scatters them under the feet of the righteous, as it is said, 'And you shall grind the wicked.'

כִּי יִהְיוּ לְאֵפֶר תַּחַת כַּפּוֹת רַגְלֵיכֶם" (מַלְאָכִי ג כא) אֲבָל הַמִּינִין וְהַמְּשׁוּמָּדִין וְהָאַפִּיקוֹרְסִין שֶׁכָּפְרוּ בַּתּוֹרָה וְשֶׁכָּפְרוּ
Because they will be like ashes under your feet" (Malachi 3:21) but the heretics and the apostates and the atheists who denied the Torah and denied.

בְּתַחְיַת הַמֵּתִים וְשֶׁפִּרְשׁוּ מִדַּרְכֵי צִבּוּר וְשֶׁנָּתְנוּ חֲתִיתָם בָּאָרֶץ מֵחַיִּים וְהֵם הַפַּרְנָסִים הַמַּטִּילִים אֵימָה יְתֵרָה עַל הַצִּבּוּר
In the resurrection of the dead, and those who have separated from the ways of the community, and who have been buried in the earth from life, and they are the leaders who cast a greater fear upon the public.

שֶׁלֹּא לְשֵׁם שָׁמַיִם כְּגוֹן מַלְכֵי גּוֹיִם אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁאֵינוֹ מַחְטִיא אוֹתָן אֶלָּא מוֹלִיכָן בְּדֶרֶךְ יְשָׁרָה
Not for the sake of Heaven, such as the kings of nations, even though he does not lead them astray but rather guides them in a straight path.

אֶלָּא הַצִּבּוּר מְכַוְּנִין דֵּעוֹתֵיהֶן וּמַעֲשֵׂיהֶן הַטּוֹבִים לַעֲבוֹדָתָן וְלֹא לַעֲבוֹדַת אֲדוֹן הַכֹּל וְשֶׁחָטְאוּ וְהֶחְטִיאוּ אֶת הָרַבִּים כְּגוֹן
But the public align their opinions and good deeds to their own work and not to the work of the Lord of all, and they sinned and caused many to sin, such as...

יַרְבַּעָם בֶּן נָבָט וַחֲבֵרָיו יוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְנִדּוֹנִין בָּהּ לְדוֹרֵי דוֹרוֹת שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְיָצְאוּ וְרָאוּ בְּפַגְרֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים הַפּוֹשְׁעִים בִּי"
Jeroboam son of Nebat and his companions descend to Gehenna and are punished there for generations, as it is said, "And they went out and saw the corpses of the men who sinned against Me."

וְכֻו' (יְשַׁעְיָהוּ סז כד)
and so on (Isaiah 67:24)

זֶה שֶׁאָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה שָׁלוֹשׁ כְּתוֹת לְיוֹם הַדִּין יוֹם מוֹעֵד הוּא לְדִין הַכֹּל הוּא שֶׁכָּתוּב
This is what the sages, may their memory be blessed, said: three groups for the Day of Judgment. It is a set day for judgment of all, as it is written.

עָלָיו (מַלְאָכִי ג כג) "יוֹם ה' הַגָּדוֹל וְהַנּוֹרָא" וְהוּא יוֹם וּזְמַן מִתְּחִלַּת הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן שָׁנִינוּ
On it (Malachi 3:23) "The great and terrible day of the Lord" and it is a day and time from the beginning of the coming world, and so we have learned.

בְּפֶרֶק חֵלֶק (סַנְהֶדְרִין י ג) אַנְשֵׁי דּוֹר הַמַּבּוּל אֵין לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאֵין עוֹמְדִין בַּדִּין.
In the chapter 'Chelek' (Sanhedrin 10:3), the people of the generation of the flood have no share in the World to Come and do not stand in judgment.

אַנְשֵׁי סְדוֹם אֵין לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֲבָל עוֹמְדִין בַּדִּין וְעֲלֵיהֶם שָׁנוּ בַּתּוֹסֶפְתָּא (סַהֲדָרִין יג א)
The people of Sodom have no share in the world to come, but they stand in judgment, and about them it is taught in the Tosefta (Sanhedrin 13a).

זֶה שֶׁאָמַרְנוּ שָׁלוֹשׁ כִּתּוֹת לְיוֹם הַדִּין וְכוּ' אֲבָל אֵין הַכַּוָּנָה לַחֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה לְהַאֲרִיךְ עֹנֶשׁ הָאָדָם
This that we said, three groups for the Day of Judgment, etc., but the intention is not for the sages, may their memory be blessed, to lengthen the punishment of man.

וְשְׂכָרוֹ עַד הַיּוֹם הַהוּא וְשֶׁלֹּא יָבוֹא דִּין וְעֹנֶשׁ אוֹ שָׂכָר לַנְּפָשׁוֹת קֹדֶם אוֹתוֹ הַדִּין אֶלָּא לְפִי
And his reward until that day, and that no judgment or punishment or reward comes to the souls before that judgment, but according to ...

שֶׁהֵם זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה מוֹנִין כַּת הַצַּדִּיקִים הַגְּמוּרִים וְהֵם הַזּוֹכִים לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא אַחַר יוֹם הַדִּין
That they, whose memory is blessed, are counted among the company of the perfect righteous, and they are those who merit eternal life in the World to Come, which follows the Day of Judgment.

לְפִיכָךְ סָפְרוּ בָּהֶם שְׂכָרָם הַגָּמוּר שֶׁהוּא חַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן כַּת הָרְשָׁעִים הַגְּמוּרִים הֵם הַנִּכְרָתִים מֵחַיֵּי
Therefore, they counted in them their full reward, which is the life of the world to come, and likewise the group of the completely wicked are those who are cut off from life.

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהֵם הַנִּדּוֹנִים בְּאוֹתוֹ הַיּוֹם הָעָתִיד לְהַחְזִירָם בְּגֵיהִנּוֹם וּלְהַכְרִית וּלְהַאֲבִיד הַנֶּפֶשׁ שָׁם מִתּוֹךְ הָעֹנֶשׁ וְהַצַּעַר
The World to Come and they are judged on that day which is destined to return them to Gehenna, to destroy and to annihilate the soul there from the punishment and the anguish.

הַגָּדוֹל הַמִּתְחַדֵּשׁ שָׁם עֲלֵיהֶם הָלְכוּ בְּבָרַיְתָא זוֹ אַחַר סוֹף מַתַּן שְׂכָרָן שֶׁלְּמִצְוֹת וְאַחַר סוֹף עֹנְשָׁן שֶׁלַּעֲבֵרוֹת
The great one who is renewed there over them went in this baraita after the end of the reward of the commandments and after the end of the punishment of the transgressions.

אֲבָל כׇּל אֶחָד וְאֶחָד מִבְּנֵי אָדָם יֵשׁ לוֹ הַדִּין בִּשְׁעַת מִיתָתוֹ וְהוּא נִדּוֹן בִּשְׁלוֹשָׁה דִּינֵי כְּתוֹת
But each and every one of the sons of man has a judgment at the time of his death, and he is judged by three judgments of groups.

הַלָּלוּ בְּעַצְמָן הַצַּדִּיקִים הַגְּמוּרִים נִכְתָּבִין וְנֶחְתָּמִין לְאַלְתָּר לְגַן עֵדֶן וְהוּא עַצְמוֹ חַיִּים מֵחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְרִשְׁעִים
These, in themselves, the perfect righteous ones are written and sealed immediately to the Garden of Eden, and he himself is life from the life of the world to come, and the wicked.

גְּמוּרִים נִכְתָּבִים וְנֶחְתָּמִים לְאַלְתָּר לְגֵיהִנֹּם וְנִדּוֹנִין בּוֹ וּבֵינוֹנִים מְצַפְצְפִים מִשָּׁם לְהוֹצִיאָן לִמְקוֹם מְנוּחָה כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָנוּ עֲתִידִין
The fully completed ones are written and sealed immediately for Gehenna and are judged there, while the intermediate ones are squeaking from there to be taken out to a place of rest, just as we are destined.

לְבָאֵר בֵּין בְּדִין שֶׁל גֵּיהִנָּם הַהוֹוֶה בְּכׇל יוֹם לְכׇל נֶפֶשׁ וְנֶפֶשׁ בֵּין בְּדִין הַגְּמוּל הָעָתִיד שֶׁהִזְכִּירוּ בַּבְּרַיְתָא
To clarify between the judgment of Gehenna that is present every day for each soul and the future reward that was mentioned in the baraita.

זו כׇּל אָדָם נִדּוֹן שָׁם כְּפִי מַעֲשָׂיו בִּשְׁלוֹשָׁה דִּינִין שֶׁמָּנוּ עָלָיו דִּין הַקַּל שֶׁבָּהֶן אֵין לוֹ
This is how every person is judged there according to his deeds in three judgments that were imposed upon him; the lightest of them does not have him.

קָצָבָה אֶלָּא כֹּל אֶחָד נִדּוֹן וּמְצַפְצֵף וְעוֹלֶה וְהַחֲמוּר שֶׁבָּהֶן לְדוֹרֵי דוֹרוֹת וְהַבֵּינוֹנִי דִּינוֹ שְׁנַיִם עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ
A fixed term, but rather each one is judged and whistles and ascends, and the most severe of them for generations of generations, and the average one's judgment is twelve months.

לְאַחַר שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ בִּזְמַן הַזֶּה גֵּיהִנָּם פּוֹלְטָתָהּ וְנִמְסָרוֹת לְדוּמָה וְאֵין לָהֶם מְנוּחָה וַאֲנַחְנוּ עֲתִידִים לְבָאֵר
After twelve months at this time, Gehenna expels her and they are handed over to Duma, and they have no rest, and we are destined to explain.

זֶה בְּדִבּוּר וּבְרֶמֶז אֲבָל לְאַחַר שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ מִן הַדִּין הַגָּדוֹל גּוּפָן כָּלָה וְנִשְׁמָתָן נִשְׂרֶפֶת וְרוּחַ
This is in speech and in hint, but after twelve months from the great judgment their body perishes and their soul is burned and the spirit.

מְפַזֶּרֶתָן תַּחַת כַּפּוֹת רַגְלֵי הַצַּדִּיקִים אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁיֵּשׁ בְּבַעֲלֵי עֲבֵרָה עַצְמָן שֶׁעֻנְשׁוֹ גָּדוֹל מֵחֲבֵרוֹ וְחִיּוּבוֹ
They scatter under the feet of the righteous, even though among the transgressors themselves there are those whose punishment is greater than that of their fellow and their liability.

יֶתֶר הִימֶנּוּ וְכֻלָּן נִדּוֹנִין שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ כָּךְ יֵשׁ בָּעֳנָשִׁים צַעַר וְיִסּוּרִין בְּגֵיהִנּוֹם לְאֶחָד יוֹתֵר מֵחֲבֵרוֹ
More than him, and all of them are judged for twelve months; thus there are punishments of pain and suffering in Gehenna, one more than the other.

גֵּיהִנּוֹם לְמַטָּה מִגֵּיהִנּוֹם לְעֹנֶשׁ וְצַעַר כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָנוּ עֲתִידִים לְהַזְכִּיר וְהַכֹּל בְּמִשְׁפָּט אֱמֶת וְדִין יוֹשֶׁר שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "כִּי
Gehenna is below Gehenna for punishment and suffering, as we are destined to mention, and everything in the judgment of truth and the law of justice, as it is said, 'for'.

כֹּל דְּרָכָיו מִשְׁפָּט
All his ways are justice.

וְאִם תִּשְׁאַל וְאֵלּוּ שֶׁקָּרְאוּ אוֹתָן חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה "בֵּינוֹנִים" לְפִי שֶׁחֲטָאֵיהֶם וּזְכוּיוֹתֵיהֶם שְׁקוּלִים וְאָמְרוּ בָּהֶן "וְרַב"
And if you ask, and those whom the sages, may their memory be blessed, called "intermediates" because their sins and merits are equal, and they said about them "and many".

חֶסֶד מַטָּה כְּלַפֵּי חֶסֶד" יוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנּוֹם אוֹ אֵין יוֹרְדִין שָׁם אִם תֹּאמַר יוֹרְדִין מָה הוֹעִילָה לָהֶם
"Kindness downward towards kindness" (i.e., kindness towards those lower than them) "descend to Gehenna or do not descend there? If you say they descend, what good does it do them?"

הַמִּדָּה הַטּוֹבָה הַזֹּאת "וְרַב חֶסֶד מַטֶּה כְּלַפֵּי חֶסֶד" וְאִם תֹּאמַר אֵין יוֹרְדִין שָׁם וְכִי עֲוֹנוֹת שְׁקוּלִים
This good measure, "and abundant mercy inclines toward mercy," and if you say that none descend there, and are sins weighed?

שֶׁעָשׂוּ בַּמֶּה יִתְכַּפְּרוּ וּתְשׁוּבַת שְׁאֵלָה זוֹ לַשּׁוֹאֵל אוֹתוֹ רָשָׁע שֶׁעָשִׂינוּ אוֹתוֹ רָשָׁע גָּמוּר שֶׁנִּדּוֹן לְגֵיהִנֹּם לְדוֹרֵי
What they did, how will they be atoned for? And the answer to this question for the one who asks that evil one, we made him a complete evil one who is sentenced to Gehenna for generations.

דּוֹרוֹת לְפִי שֶׁכָּפַר בִּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים אוֹ הֵטִיל אֵימָה יְתֵרָה עַל הַצִּבּוּר וְהוּא הָיָה עוֹסֵק בְּמִצְוָה וּבְתוֹרָה
Generations according to whether he denied the resurrection of the dead or instilled excessive fear upon the public, and he was occupied with a commandment and Torah.

במה ישתלם שכרו וכי לא יהיה בינו ובין העובד עבודה זרה כל ימיו ומגלה עריות ושופך


דָּמִים חֲלוּק וְהֶפְרֵשׁ ה' צַדִּיק לֹא יַעֲשֶׂה עֲוֹלָה אֶלָּא הָעוֹשֶׂה מִצְוֹת וּמַעֲשִׂים טוֹבִים וְעוֹבֵר עֲבֵרוֹת הַרְבֵּה
Blood is divided and separated by the Lord, the righteous one, who does not do evil, but rather does commandments and good deeds, and transgresses many sins.

או עֲבֵרָה אַחַת חֲמוּרָה שֶׁרָאוּי לִהְיוֹת אָבֵד בָּהּ וְנִדּוֹן כְּרָשָׁע גָּמוּר מְשַׁלֵּם לוֹ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא
Or a single severe transgression for which it is fitting to be destroyed in it and judged as a complete wicked one, the Holy One, blessed be He, pays him.

שָׂכַר אוֹתָן הַמִּצְוֹת בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וּמְשַׁלֵּם לְשׂוֹנְאָיו אֶל פָּנָיו לְהַאֲבִידוֹ" (דְּבָרִים ז י) כִּדְמַתַּרְגֵּם אוּנְקְלוֹס
He rewarded them for those commandments in this world, as it is said, "And He repays His enemies to their faces to destroy them" (Deuteronomy 7:1), as Onkelos translates.

וּמְשַׁלֵּם לִשְׂנֹאָהִי טַבּוּן דְּאִינּוּן עֲבַדִּין קִדְמוֹהִי בְּחַיֵּיהוֹן בְּהַאי עָלְמָא לְאַבֵּד בְּעָלְמָא דְּאָתֵי לָא מְאַחֵר עוֹבֵד טַב
And he pays for his enemies' good deeds, which they did before him in this world to be lost in the world to come, not delaying a good worker.

לְשַׁנְּאוֹהִי טַבִּין דְּאִינּוּן עַבְדִין קַדָּמוֹהִי בְּחַיֵּיהוֹן מְשַׁלֵּם לְהוֹן וְכֵן הַצַּדִּיק הַזֶּה שֶׁהוּא שָׁקוּל וְהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא
For they are good, those who serve Him in their lives, He pays them, and so is this righteous one who is weighed and the Holy One, blessed be He.

בְּרַחֲמָיו הָרַבִּים מַטֶּה לוֹ כְּלַפֵּי חֶסֶד וְעוֹשֶׂה אוֹתוֹ כְּצַדִּיק גָּמוּר אֵינוֹ יוֹרֵד לְגֵיהִנּוֹם אֶלָּא בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה
In His abundant mercies, He inclines him towards kindness and makes him like a perfect righteous person; he does not descend to Gehenna, but in this world.

נֶעֱנַשׁ עַל עֲוֹנוֹת שֶׁעָשָׂה וְחַטָּאָיו הָרִאשׁוֹנִים וְנִצַּל מִדִּינָה שֶׁל גֵּיהִנּוֹם כָּךְ שָׁנוּ חֲכָמִים רֻבּוֹ זְכֻיּוֹת וּמִעוּטוֹ עֲבֵרוֹת
He was punished for the sins he committed and his earlier transgressions, but was saved from the judgment of Gehenna. The sages taught that most of his deeds were righteous and only a few were sins.

נִפְרָעִין מִמֶּנּוּ מִעוּט עֲבֵרוֹת קַלּוֹת שֶׁעָשָׂה בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בִּשְׁבִיל לִתֵּן לוֹ שְׂכָרוֹ מָשְׁלָם לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא רֻבּוֹ
We exact from him a small number of light transgressions that he committed in this world, in order to give him his full reward in the World to Come, the majority of it.

עֲבֵרוֹת וּמִעוּטוֹ זְכִיּוֹת נוֹתְנִין לוֹ מַתַּן שְׂכַר מִצְוֹת קַלּוֹת שֶׁעָשָׂה בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בִּשְׁבִיל לִפְרֹעַ מִמֶּנּוּ מְשַׁלֵּם
Transgressions and few merits are given to him as a reward for the easy commandments he performed in this world, in order to pay him back in full.

לְעָתִיד לָבֹא כְּמוֹ שֶׁמְּפֹרָשׁ בְּמַסֶּכֶת פֵּאָה (יְרוּשַׁלְמִי פֵּאָה א א).
For the future to come, as is explained in the tractate of Peah (Jerusalem Talmud, Peah 1:1).

וְאִם תֹּאמַר אֲנִי שׁוֹאֵל אוֹתְךָ עַל הַמֵּת הַנִּדּוֹן שֶׁהוּא שָׁקוּל בִּשְׁעַת דִּינוֹ וְאַתָּה מְשִׁיבֵנִי הַחַי שֶׁנִּפְרָעִין
And if you say, "I ask you about the dead who is judged, that he is weighed at the time of his judgment, and you answer me about the living who are repaid."

מִמֶּנּוּ בְּחַיָּיו וּלְדִבְרֶיךָ אֵין אָדָם בָּא לִידֵי הַמִּדָּה הַזּוֹ שֶׁיִּהְיֶה שָׁקוּל וְיִהְיֶה רַב חֶסֶד עַל מִטָּה
From him in his lifetime and according to your words, no man comes to the measure of this that he will be weighed and that he will be a great kindness on a bed.

כִּלְפֵי חֶסֶד וּבַבָּרַיְתָא שָׁנִינוּ שָׁלוֹשׁ כְּתוֹת לְיוֹם הַדִּין הַצַּדִּיק וְהַשָּׁקוּל וְהָרָשָׁע וּמַשְׁמָע דִּבְשַׁעַת דִּינָן לְאַחַר מִיתָה
With regard to kindness, and in the baraita we learned that there are three groups for the Day of Judgment: the righteous, the intermediate, and the wicked. It seems that at the time of their judgment after death.

בְּמִדּוֹת הַלָּלוּ הֵם אָנוּ כָּךְ הֵשִׁיבוּנוּ אֵלֶיךָ דַּיַּן הָאֱמֶת יִתְבָּרֵךְ שְׁמוֹ דָּן הָאָדָם לְפִי מַעֲשָׂיו יֵשׁ
In these measures, they, we, thus answered you, the Judge of Truth, may His name be blessed, who judges man according to his deeds.

עֲוֹנוֹת שֶׁדִּינוֹ לִפָּרַע מִן הָעוֹשֶׂה אוֹתָן בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בַּחַיִּים וְיֵשׁ מֵהֶם שֶׁדִּינוֹ לִפָּרַע מֵהֶן לְאַחַר מִיתָה
Sins whose judgment is to be exacted from the one who performs them in this world during life, and some of them whose judgment is to be exacted from them after death.

בְּדִין גֵּיהִנֹּם וְכִיּוֹן שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא דָּן אֶת הָאָדָם בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה וְהוּא שָׁקוּל וּמְעֻיָּן מִדַּת רַב חֶסֶד
In the judgment of Gehenna, and when the Holy One, blessed be He, judges a person on Rosh Hashanah and he is weighed and measured by the attribute of abundant kindness.

שֶׁלּוֹ שֶׁהוּא מַטֶּה כְּלַפֵּי חֶסֶד פּוֹטְרוֹ מִגֵּיהִנֹּם וְהַדִּין נוֹתֵן שֶׁיִּפְרַע מִמַּחֲצָה עֲוֹנוֹת שֶׁלּוֹ בַּחַיִּים בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה
His, which bends toward mercy, frees him from Gehenna, and the judgment gives that he will pay for half of his sins in life in this world.

וְכָךְ הִיא הַמִּדָּה בְּרֻבּוֹ זְכִיּוֹת וּמִעוּטוֹ עֲבֵרוֹת אֵין מַמְתִּינִין לוֹ עַד יוֹם הַמִּיתָה אֶלָּא כֵּיוָן שֶׁרוֹאֶה
And this is the measure: when most of his deeds are merits and few are sins, they do not wait for him until the day of death, but as soon as he sees...

הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא שֶׁהוּא מִזְדַּכֶּה בְּעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת מַקְדִּים לוֹ וְגוֹבֶה מִמֶּנּוּ מִעוּט עֲבֵרוֹת בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בַּחַיִּים
The Holy One, blessed be He, who purifies Himself in the world of souls, precedes and exacts from him a small number of transgressions in this world during life.

וּלְפִי הַמִּדָּה הַזּוֹ הָיָה רֻבּוֹ זְכִיּוֹת בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה וְנִגְזְרָה עָלָיו מִיתָה אִם הִכְרִיעַ עַצְמוֹ לְכַף חוֹבָה
And according to this measure, most of his deeds were merits on Rosh Hashanah, and a death sentence was decreed upon him if he tipped the scales of judgment towards guilt.

בֵּין שֶׁיְּהֵא שָׁקוּל בֵּין שֶׁיְּהֵא רֻבּוֹ עֲבֵרוֹת הֲרֵי הֶאֱרִיךְ הַדִּין עַל עַצְמוֹ עַד שֶׁיְּקַבֵּל שָׂכָר מִצְוֹתָיו
Whether it is balanced or whether most of it is transgressions, the judgment has been prolonged upon himself until he receives the reward of his commandments.

אוֹ פּוּרְעָנוּת עֲוֹנוֹתָיו וּפִשְׁעָיו בֵּין שֶׁיְּקַבֵּל אוֹתָן בְּאַרְכּוּת יָמָיו אוֹ בִּשְׁאַר הַמִּדּוֹת בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּדֵי שֶׁיִּהְיֶה
Or the calamity of his sins and transgressions, whether he receives them in the length of his days or in other measures in this world, so that he will be ...

הַגְּמוּל שָׁלֵם וְקַיָּם לוֹ לְעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכִּירוּ חֲכָמִים בַּמָּקוֹם שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ וְכֵן שְׁנוּיָה עוֹד בְּבְרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה
The reward is complete and exists for him for the eternity of souls, as the sages mentioned in the place that we mentioned, and likewise it is also mentioned in Bereishit Rabbah.

(לג א) רַבִּי עֲקִיבָא אוֹמֵר אֶחָד אֵלּוּ וְאֶחָד אֵלּוּ מְדַקְדֵּק עִמָּם עַד תְּהוֹם רַבָּה מְדַקְדֵּק עִם
Rabbi Akiva says: one of these and one of those, he is meticulous with them until a great abyss, he is meticulous with.

הַצַּדִּיקִים וְגוֹבֶה מֵהֶם מִעוּט מַעֲשִׂים רָעִים שֶׁעָשׂוּ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּדֵי לְהַשְׁפִּיעַ לָהֶם שְׁלוֹה לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וּמַשְׁפִּיעַ
The righteous, and He takes from them a small number of bad deeds they did in this world in order to influence them with peace in the next world, and influences.

שְׁלוֹהָ לָרְשָׁעִים וְנוֹתֵן לָהֶם שָׂכָר מִצְוֹת קַלּוֹת בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּדֵי לְהִפָּרַע מֵהֶם לָעֵתִיד לָבוֹא.
He gives peace to the wicked and gives them reward for easy commandments in this world in order to exact payment from them in the future.

וְעוֹד אָמְרוּ אֲבָל רַבָּתִי (ה) כְּשֶׁנֶּאֱחַז רַבָּן שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן גַּמְלִיאֵל וְרַבִּי יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן אֱלִישָׁע גָּזְרוּ עֲלֵיהֶם
Furthermore, they said: 'But Rabati (h) when Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel and Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha were seized, they decreed upon them.'

שיהרגו והיה רבי ישמעאל בוכה אמר לו רבן שמעון בן גמליאל רבי מפני מה אתה בוכה


לִשְׁתֵּי פְּסִיעוֹת אַתָּה נָתוּן בְּחֶלְקָן שֶׁלַּצַּדִּיקִים וְאַתָּה בּוֹכֶה אָמַר לוֹ אֲנִי בּוֹכֶה עַל שֶׁאָנוּ נֶהֶרְגִין כְּעוֹבְדֵי
For two steps you are placed in the portion of the righteous, and you are crying. He said to him: I am crying because we are being killed like the worshippers.

עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה וּמְגַלֵּי עֲרָיוֹת וְשׁוֹפְכֵי דָּמִים וְכִמְחַלְּלֵי שַׁבָּתוֹת אָמַר לוֹ רַבִּי שֶׁמָּא סוֹעֵד הָיִיתָ אוֹ יָשֵׁן
"Idolatry and those who reveal sexual immorality and those who shed blood and those who desecrate the Sabbaths, the Rabbi said to him: 'Perhaps you were dining or sleeping?'"

וּבָאָה אֵלֶיךָ אִשָּׁה לִשְׁאֹל עַל נִדָּתָהּ וְעַל טֻמְאָתָהּ וְעַל טַהֲרָתָהּ וְאָמַרְתָּ לָהּ הַמְתִּינִי עַד שֶׁאִישָׁן וְהַתּוֹרָה
and a woman came to you to ask about her menstruation, impurity, and purity, and you said to her, "Wait until I sleep and the Torah."

אָמְרָה (שְׁמוֹת כב כא) "כׇּל אַלְמָנָה וְיָתוֹם לֹא תְּעַנּוּן אִם עָנָה תְּעַנֶּה אוֹתוֹ" וְכָתִיב בַּתְרֵיהָ "וְחָרָה".
She said (Exodus 22:21) "All widow and orphan you shall not oppress; if you oppress him, then I will surely punish you." And it is written after it "and it will be angry."

אַפִּי וְהָרַגְתִּי אֶתְכֶם בְּחֶרֶב "בְּחַרְבִּי" לֹא נֶאֱמַר אֶלָּא "בְּחֶרֶב" לְפִי הַמִּדָּה הַזּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל רַבִּי צַעַר וְיִסּוּרִין
"My anger and I killed you with a sword" – "with my sword" is not said, but "with a sword". According to this measure, Israel is full of suffering and affliction.

בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה יוֹתֵר מִשְּׁאַר הָאֻמּוֹת כֵּיצַד אִי אֶפְשָׁר לָאֻמּוֹת בְּלֹא צְדָקָה וּבְלֹא מַעֲשִׂים נָאִים וְאִי אֶפְשָׁר
In this world more than other nations, how is it possible for nations without charity and without good deeds, and it is impossible.

לְיִשְׂרָאֵל בְּלֹא עֲבֵרוֹת אֶלָּא שֶׁהָאֻמּוֹת אוֹבְדִין בְּעֹנֶשׁ עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה שֶׁלָּהֶם לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְאַבֶּדֶן וְיִשְׂרָאֵל חֶלְקָם בַּחַיִּים שֶׁדְּבֵקִים
For Israel without transgressions, except that the nations are lost in the punishment of their idolatry to Gehenna and destruction, and Israel's portion is in life that they are attached to.

בְּיוֹצֵר הַכֹּל יִתְבָּרֵךְ וּלְפִיכָךְ הַדִּין מָתוּחַ כְּנֶגֶד יִשְׂרָאֵל לִפְרֹעַ מֵהֶן מִלִּכְלוּךְ עֲוֹנוֹתֵיהֶם בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וּמִדַּת הַטּוֹב.
In the Creator of all, may He be blessed, and therefore the judgment is drawn against Israel to exact from them the filth of their sins in this world and the measure of good.

פְּרוּשָׂה עַל הָאֻמּוֹת לְשַׁלֵּם לָהֶם שָׂכָר טוֹב בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה עַל מַעֲשִׂים נָאִים וְצֶדָקָה שֶׁעוֹשִׂין זֶהוּ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר
It is spread over the nations to pay them good reward in this world for good deeds and charity that they do; this is what is said.

רַק אֶתְכֶם יָדַעְתִּי מִכׇּל מִשְׁפְּחוֹת הָאֲדָמָה עַל כֵּן אֲפַקֵּד עֲלֵיכֶם אֶת כׇּל עֲוֹנֹתֵיכֶם
Only you I have known from all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your sins.

וְכָךְ דָּרְשׁוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת תַּעֲנִית (יא א') "אֵל אֱמוּנָה" כְּשֵׁם שֶׁנִּפְרָעִין מִן הָרְשָׁעִים לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אַפִּלּוּ עַל
"And so they expounded in the tractate of Ta'anit (11a) 'El Emunah' (God of Faith) just as the wicked are punished in the World to Come even for..."

עֲבֵרָה קַלָּה שֶׁעָשׂוּ כָּךְ נִפְרָעִין מִן הַצַּדִּיקִין בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה אֲפִלּוּ עַל עֲבֵרָה קַלָּה שֶׁעוֹשִׂין "וְאֵין עוֹל".
Even for a minor transgression that they commit, they are punished from the righteous in this world, even for a minor transgression that they do, "and there is no injustice."

כְּשֵׁם שֶׁמְּשַׁלְּמִין שָׂכָר טוֹב לִצְדִיקִים לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא אֲפִלּוּ עַל מִצְוָה קַלָּה שֶׁעוֹשִׂים כָּךְ מְשַׁלְּמִים שָׂכָר לָרְשָׁעִים
Just as a good reward is paid to the righteous in the future for even a minor commandment they perform, so a reward is paid to the wicked.

בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה עַל מִצְוָה קַלָּה שֶׁעוֹשִׂים וְאָמְרוּ לְפִי דֶּרֶךְ זוֹ (בְּרָכוֹת סא ב') "לֹא אִיבְּרֵי עָלְמָא"
In this world for a light command that they do, and they said according to this way (Berakhot 61b) "the world was not created."

אֶלָּא אוֹ לְצַדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים אוֹ לְרֵשָׁעִים גְּמוּרִים" כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁהַצַּדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים אוֹכְלִין הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְנוֹחֲלִים הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא
"But either to the completely righteous or to the completely wicked" meaning that the completely righteous eat this world and inherit the next world.

שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (מִשְׁלֵי ח כָּא) לְהַנְחִיל אוֹהֲבַי יֵשׁ וְאוֹצְרוֹתֵיהֶם אֲמַלֵּא" וְרַשָּׁעִים גְּמוּרִים אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁיּוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנָּם
As it is said (Proverbs 8:21) "to inherit my lovers, I have filled their treasures," and complete sinners, even though they descend to Gehenna.

לְבָאֵר שַׁחַת אוֹכְלִין הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בִּשְׂכַר מִעוּט מַעֲשִׂים טוֹבִים שֶׁעָשׂוּ וְזֶהוּ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (מִשְׁלֵי יא לא)
To explain the ruin that the world of this age eats in the reward of a few good deeds that they did, and this is what is said (Proverbs 11:30).

הֵן צַדִּיק בָּאָרֶץ יְשֻׁלָּם אַף כִּי רָשָׁע וְחוֹטֵא" כְּלוֹמַר הֵן הַצַּדִּיק מִשְׁתַּלֵּם בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה עַל עֲבֵרוֹת
Indeed, a righteous man is rewarded in the land, even though a wicked and sinful one; that is, the righteous man is rewarded in this world for his sins.

שֶׁעָשָׂה קַל וְחֹמֶר שֶׁיִּשְׁתַּלֵּם הָרָשָׁע וְהַחוֹטֵא רַבּוֹתֵינוּ לָמְדוּ שֶׁמִּתַּשְׁלוּמֵי הַצַּדִּיק שֶׁאָנוּ רוֹאִין בָּאָרֶץ שֶׁהוּא הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה
He made a kal v'chomer that the wicked and the sinner will be repaid, and our sages learned from the reward of the righteous that we see in this world.

יֵשׁ לָנוּ לִלְמֹד תַּשְׁלוּם הָרְשָׁעִים לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא בְּקַל וָחֹמֶר.
We have to study the punishment of the wicked in the World to Come by a fortiori argument.

אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁהַמִּדָּה כָּךְ הִיא כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכִּירוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה אֶפְשָׁר כְּשֶׁיֶּחְטָא הָאָדָם סָמוּךְ לַמִּיתָה
Even though the measure is such as our sages mentioned, it is possible that when a person sins close to death.

וִיכְרִיעַ עַצְמוֹ לְכַף חוֹבָה וְזַכּוּיוֹת שֶׁעָשָׂה מְקִילִּין לוֹ מְדִינַת שֶׁל גֵּיהִנֹּם וְכֵן מִי שֶׁהָיָה רֻבּוֹ עֲוֹנוֹת
And he will decide himself to the side of obligation, and the merits he has done will lighten for him the judgment of Gehenna, and likewise one whose majority are sins.

וְסָמוּךְ לַמִּיתָה שָׁקַל עַצְמוֹ וְהָיָה מַחֲצָה זְכֻיּוֹת וּמַחֲצָה עֲבֵרוֹת רַב חֶסֶד מַטֶּה לוֹ כְּלַפֵּי חֶסֶד וְזוֹכֶה
And close to death he weighed himself and it was half merits and half transgressions; the Merciful One inclines him toward mercy and he is saved.

בְּעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וּמַחֲצָה עֲבֵרוֹת שֶׁעָשָׂה גּוֹרְעִין מִמֶּנּוּ חֶלְקוֹ שֶׁכׇּל אָדָם לְפִי מַעֲשָׂיו זוֹכֶה לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כָּךְ
In the world of souls, and half of the transgressions he committed, they deduct from his share, that each person according to his deeds merits the World to Come.

אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים (בָּבָא בַּתְרָא ע"ה א') "מְלַמֵּד שֶׁכׇּל צַדִּיק וְצַדִּיק נִכְוֶה מֵחֻפָּתוֹ שֶׁל חֲבֵרוֹ וְאָמְרוּ עָשָׁן בַּחֻפָּה"
The Sages said (Bava Batra 75a) 'It teaches that each righteous person is burned by the wedding canopy of his fellow righteous person, and they said: smoke in the wedding canopy.'

לָמָּה וְכׇל שֶׁכֵּן וְכֵן אֶפְשָׁר שֶׁזֶּה הַדִּין נוֹהֵג בְּמִי שֶׁהָיָה בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה בְּמִדָּה אַחַת וְנִגְזַר עָלָיו דִּינוֹ
Why etc. and likewise it is possible that this law applies to one who was on Rosh Hashanah in one measure and his judgment was sealed.

וְאַחַר כָּךְ הִכְרִיעַ עַצְמוֹ לְצַד אַחַת מִן הַמִּדּוֹת שֶׁדִּינוֹ בִּמְקוֹמוֹ עוֹמֵד וּבְעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת הוּא הַנִּדּוֹן בִּשְׁלוֹשׁ
And afterwards he decided himself to one side of the measures that his judgment in his place stands, and in the world of souls he is the one judged in three.

כְּתוֹת הַלָּלוּ כִּפְשַׁט הַבָּרַיְתָא.
These sects are as the plain meaning of the baraita.

כשנפרעין ממי שרובו זכיות על מיעוט עבירות שעשה בעולם הזה הרי הוא כאילו לא עשאן ונותנין


לוֹ בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא כְּמוֹ שֶׁרָאוּי לִזְכֻיּוֹת שֶׁעָשָׂה אַף עַל פִּי כֵן מִי שֶׁבְּיָדוֹ מֵאָה מִצְווֹת וְאֵין
"If in the world to come as is fitting for the merits he made, even so, one who has in his hand a hundred commandments and does not..."

בידו עבירה ומי שבידו מאה מצוות כמותן והיו בידו עבירות אלא שנפרעו ממנו בעולם הזה אין


חֶלְקָם בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא שָׁוֶה שֶׁזֶּה צַדִּיק גָּמוּר וְזֶה אֵינוֹ צַדִּיק גָּמוּר לָפִיכָךְ נִפְרָעִים מִמֶּנּוּ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה
Their share in the World to Come is equal, because this one is a completely righteous person and that one is not a completely righteous person; therefore, they are repaid from him in this world.

בִּכְדֵי שֶׁיִּהְיֶה רָאוּי לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא לֹא שֶׁיַּגִּיעַ לְמַעֲלַת הַצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁלֹּא חָטְאוּ אֶלָּא כֹּל שֶׁנָּקִי וְזַכַּאי מֵחֲבֵרוֹ
In order to be worthy of the World to Come, it is not that he will reach the level of the righteous who did not sin, but rather that each one who is pure and righteous compared to his fellow.

חֶלְקוֹ בְּטוֹב מְרוּבָּה מִשֶּׁל חֲבֵרוֹ כְּפִי מָה שֶׁרָאוּי לְכׇל אֶחָד לְפִי אֱמוּנָתוֹ וּכְפִי מַעֲשָׂיו כִּי "אֱלוֹהַי
His share in the abundant good of his fellow is according to what is appropriate for each one according to his faith and according to his deeds, because "My God" ...

מִשְׁפַּט ה' אַשְׁרֵי כֹּל חוֹכֶה לּוֹ
The judgment of the Lord, blessed is everyone who waits for Him.

וְעוֹד מָצִינוּ שֶׁאָמְרוּ חֲכָמֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (בְּרָכוֹת ה א') אִם רוֹאֶה אָדָם שֶׁיְּסוּרִין בָּאִין עָלָיו יְפַשְׁפֵּשׁ
And we also found that our sages, of blessed memory, said (Berakhot 5a) that if a person sees that afflictions are coming upon him, he should examine himself.

בְּמַעֲשָׂיו שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (אֵיכָה ג מ) "נְחַפֵּשָׂה דְּרָכֵינוּ וְנַחְקֹרָה" פִּשְׁפֵּשׁ וְלֹא מָצָא יִתְלֶה בְּבִטּוּל תּוֹרָה תָּלָה וְלֹא
In his deeds that are said (Eicha 3:40) "We will search our ways and examine them," he searched and did not find; he will hang on the nullification of Torah, he hung and not.

מָצָא בְּיָדוּעַ שֶׁיְּסוּרִין שֶׁלְּאַהֲבָה הֵן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (מִשְׁלֵי ג יב) "כִּי אֶת אֲשֶׁר יֶאֱהַב ה' יוֹכִיחַ" וְאָמַר
It is known that afflictions are for love, as it is said (Proverbs 3:12) "For whom the Lord loves He disciplines" and it is said.

רַבָּה אָמַר רַב סְחוֹרָה כֹּל שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא חָפֵץ בּוֹ מַדְכְּאוֹ בְּיִסּוּרִין שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (יְשַׁעְיָהוּ נ"ג י)
Rabbah said: Rav Sachora: All that the Holy One, blessed be He, desires, He crushes with afflictions, as it is said (Isaiah 53:10).

וְה' חָפֵץ דְּכָאוֹ הַחֲלִי" לָמַדְנוּ מֵהֶן זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה שֶׁיִּסּוּרִין בָּאִין תְּחִלָּה עַל מַעֲשָׂיו הָרָעִים שֶׁלָּאָדָם וְהֵן
"And the Lord desired to afflict him with illness" we learned from them, may their memory be blessed, that afflictions come first because of a person's evil deeds, and they are.

עֲבֵרוֹת שֶׁל לֹא תַּעֲשֶׂה שֶׁהַדִּין נוֹתֵן שֶׁיֵּעָנֵשׁ עֲלֵיהֶם לָפִיכָךְ כְּשֶׁיִּסּוּרִין בָּאִין עָלָיו רָאוּי לוֹ לְפַשְׁפֵּשׁ בְּמַעֲשָׂיו
Transgressions of "do not do" that the judgment gives that he will be punished for them, therefore when afflictions come upon him it is proper for him to examine his deeds.

וְלַחֲזֹר מֵהֶן בְּתְשׁוּבָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "נַחְפְּשָׂה דְּרָכֵינוּ וְנַחְקֹרָה וְנָשׁוּבָה עַד ה'" וּפְעָמִים שֶׁיִּסּוּרִין בָּאִין עַל בִּטּוּל תּוֹרָה
And to return from them in repentance, as it is said, "We will search out our ways and examine them, and we will return to the Lord," and sometimes afflictions come upon the neglect of Torah.

וְכֵן כִּיּוֹצֵא בָּזֶה זֶהוּ בִּטּוּלֵי מִצְוַת עֲשֵׂה כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמַר רַב קַטִּינָא לַמַּלְאָךְ שֶׁנִּתְגַּלָּה לוֹ (מְנָחוֹת מ"א א').
And likewise, like this, this is the nullification of a positive commandment, as Rav Katina said to the angel who was revealed to him (Menachot 41a).

וְכִי עֲנָשִׁיתוֹ אֶעֱשֶׂה וְאָמַר לוֹ בְּעִדָּן רִתְחָא עָנְשִׁינַן לְפִיכָךְ מִי שֶׁבָּאוּ עָלָיו יִסּוּרִין וּפִשְׁפֵּשׁ בְּעַצְמוֹ וְלֹא
"And if you punish him, I will do it," and he said to him: "In a time of anger we punish; therefore, whoever has afflictions upon him and searches within himself and does not..."

מָצָא בְּיָדוֹ עֲבֵרָה וְחֵטְא שֶׁיֵּשׁ בְּיָדוֹ יְדִיעָה בַּתְּחִלָּה וּבַסּוֹף יִתְלֶה הַיִּסּוּרִין בְּבִטּוּלֵי מִצְוַת עֲשֵׂה שֶׁאֵינוֹ מְזַדְרֵז
He finds in his hand a transgression and a sin, because he has knowledge at the beginning and at the end, he will attribute the afflictions to the neglect of positive commandments, which he does not hasten to fulfill.

בָּהֶן לַעֲשׂוֹתָן כָּרָאוּי אֶלָּא מִתְעַצֵּל בַּעֲשִׂיָּתָן וּבְקִיּוּמָן אֲבָל מִי שֶׁהוּא צַדִּיק גָּמוּר וְאֵין בְּיָדוֹ עֲבֵרוֹת וְלֹא
In them to do them properly, but he is lazy in their doing and in their fulfillment; but whoever is a perfect righteous person and has no transgressions in his hand and not.

בְּטוּלֵי מִצְוֹת אֵין אֵלּוּ יִסּוּרִין שֶׁל עֲבֵרוֹת אֶלָּא יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלֹּא-לְאַהֲבָה וְהֵן כְּדֶרֶךְ הַיִּסּוּרִין שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ לְמַעְלָה לִתֵּן
In the nullification of commandments, these are not the afflictions of transgressions, but rather afflictions of love, and they are like the afflictions we explained above to give.

לו שכר משלם לעולם הבא ולמה נקראו "יסורין שלאהבה" והלא יסורין שפירש יסורין שלעונשין הן על


מִעוּט שֶׁעָשָׂה כְּגוֹן שֶׁהֵן בָּאִין עַל שְׁגָגַת מַעֲשֶׂה וְעַל הַעֲלָם דָּבָר עֲבֵרוֹת כֵּיצַד הֲרֵי שֶׁאָכַל חֵלֶב
A minority that he did, such as they come upon the inadvertence of an action and upon the concealment of a matter of transgressions, how? For example, if he ate fat.

בְּשׁוֹגֵג נִקְרָא חוֹטֵא שֶׁכָּךְ קְרָאָתוֹ הַתּוֹרָה בְּכׇל מָקוֹם וּמַהוּ חֲטָאוֹ שֶׁלֹּא נִזְהַר בְּעַצְמוֹ וְלֹא הָיָה חָרֵד
Inadvertently he is called a sinner, for so the Torah calls him everywhere, and what is his sin? That he did not guard himself and was not fearful.

וַיִּרְאֶה אֶת דִּבְרֵי הַמָּקוֹם בָּרוּךְ הוּא שֶׁלֹּא יֹאכַל וְלֹא יַעֲשֶׂה דָּבָר עַד שֶׁיִּבְדֹּק יָפֶה יָפֶה וְיִתְגַּלֶּה
And he saw the words of the blessed place that he should not eat nor do anything until he carefully examines and is revealed.

לוֹ הַדָּבָר שֶׁהוּא מֻתָּר וְרָאוּי לוֹ לְפִי מִדּוֹתָיו שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא וְעַל דֶּרֶךְ הַזֶּה הוּא.
If the thing is permitted and appropriate for him according to the measures of the Holy One, blessed be He, and in this manner he is.

טַעַם חֲטָא הַשִּׁגָּגָה בְּכׇל הַתּוֹרָה וְעוֹד שֶׁכׇּל דָּבָר הָאָסוּר מְלַכְלֵךְ הַנֶּפֶשׁ וּמְטַמֵּא אוֹתָהּ דִּכְתִיב "וְנִטְמֵאתֶם בָּם"
The taste of the sin of inadvertence in all the Torah, and also that every forbidden thing defiles the soul and contaminates it, as it is written "and you shall be defiled by them."

לְפִיכָךְ נִקְרָא הַשּׁוֹגֵג חוֹטֵא אַף עַל פִּי כֵן אֵין הַשּׁוֹגֵג רָאוּי לְהֵעָנֵשׁ בְּגֵיהִנֹּם וּבְאֵר שַׁחַת אֶלָּא
Therefore the inadvertent one is called a sinner; yet nevertheless the inadvertent one is not worthy of being punished in Gehenna and the Pit of Destruction, but rather...

שֶׁהוּא צָרִיךְ מֵירוּק מֵאוֹתוֹ עָוֹן וּלְהִקָּדֵשׁ וּלְהִטַּהֵר מִמֶּנּוּ כְּדֵי שֶׁיְּהֵא רָאוּי לַמַּעֲלָה הַהוֹגֶנֶת לְמַעֲשָׂיו הַטּוֹבִים בָּעוֹלָם
that he needs purification from that sin and to sanctify and purify himself from it, so that he will be worthy of the appropriate elevation for his good deeds in the world.

הַבָּא לְפִיכָךְ חָס הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עַל עַמּוֹ וְעַל חֲסִידָיו וְנָתַן לָהֶם קׇרְבָּנוֹת לְהִתְכַּפֵּר בָּהֶן הַשְּׁגָגוֹת
Therefore, the Holy One, blessed be He, had mercy on His people and on His pious ones and gave them sacrifices to atone for their unintentional sins.

וְכִשֶׁאֵין בֵּית הַמִּקְדָּשׁ קַיָּם מְשַׁלֵּחַ עֲלֵיהֶם יִסּוּרִין לְמָרֵק אוֹתָן הַשְּׁגָגוֹת וּלְהִתְכַּפֵּר בַּיִּסּוּרִין כְּדֵי לִהְיוֹתָן נְקִיִּים לָעוֹלָם
And when the Temple is not standing, He sends afflictions upon them to purify those unintentional sins and to atone for them through afflictions, so that they may be pure forever.

הַבָּא כְּשֵׁם שֶׁהַקׇּרְבָּנוֹת אַהֲבָה וְחֶמְלָה עַל יִשְׂרָאֵל כָּךְ יִסּוּרִין הַלָּלוּ אַהֲבָה וְחֶמְלָה עַל הָאָדָם אֲבָל מִכֹּל
"Just as the sacrifices are love and mercy for Israel, so these afflictions are love and mercy for the person, but from all..."

מקום אפילו יסורין אלו לכפרה הן באים.


וְכָךְ אָמַר שָׁם רַבִּי יוֹחָנָן (בְּרָכוֹת ה ב') "נְגָעִים וּבָנִים אֵינָן יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלֹּא-לְאַהֲבָה" וּפָרֵיךְ "וּנְגָעִים לֹא"
And so said there Rabbi Yochanan (Berakhot 5b): "Negaim and children are not afflictions of love," and he objects, "And negaim are not?"

וְהָאָמַר רַבִּי כׇּל שֶׁיֵּשׁ בּוֹ מֵאַרְבַּע מַרְאוֹת נְגָעִים הַלָּלוּ אֵינָן אֶלָּא מִזְבַּח כַּפָּרָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל" הֲרֵי שֶׁדָּמוֹ
"And did Rabbi say that all that is in it from the four appearances of these afflictions are not but a sacrifice of atonement for Israel? Behold, his blood."

מִזְבֵּחַ כַּפָּרָה לְיִסּוּרִין שֶׁל אַהֲבָה וְאַף עַל פִּי שֶׁתֵּרֵץ "מִזְבַּח כַּפָּרָה הֲווּ יִסּוּרִין שֶׁל אַהֲבָה לֹא הֲווּ"
An altar of atonement for the afflictions of love, and even though he explained "an altar of atonement is afflictions of love, it is not."

לֹמַר שֶׁאֵין הַכַּוָּנָה לְדַמּוֹתוֹ לַמִּזְבֵּחַ מַמָּשׁ אֶלָּא כְּשֵׁם שֶׁהַמִּזְבֵּחַ מְכַפֵּר עַל הָרָאוּי לוֹ וְהֵן הַשְּׁגָגוֹת כָּךְ
To say that the intention is not to liken it to an actual altar, but just as the altar atones for what is due to it, namely the unintentional sins, so too.

מַרְאוֹת נְגָעִים מְכַפְּרִין עַל הַזְּדוֹנוֹת וְעוֹד תֵּרְצוּ עִנְיָן אַחֵר וְאָמְרוּ הָא לָן וְהָא לָהוּ כְּלוֹמַר שַׁבָּתִי
The appearances of afflictions atone for sins, and they further explained another matter and said: this is for us and that is for them, that is, I rested.

אֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל טְהוֹרִין וְאַרְצָם טְהוֹרָה וְהַנְּגָעִים מַרְחִיקִין אֶת בַּעֲלֵיהֶם מִכׇּל אָדָם וּמִכׇּל מַגָּע אֵין זֶה יִסּוּרִין
The land of Israel is pure, and its land is pure, and the leprous diseases distance their owners from all people and all contact; this is not suffering.

שֶׁלֹּא-אָהֲבָה לְפִי שֶׁהָעֹנֶשׁ הַגָּדוֹל אֵין רָאוּי אֶלָּא לְחַטָּאֵי הַזְּדוֹן וְהָעֲוֹנוֹת הַחֲמוּרִים אֲבָל בְּבָבֶל שֶׁאֵינָן נִזְהָרִין בְּטֻמְאָה
That she did not love, because the great punishment is not appropriate except for intentional sins and serious transgressions, but in Babylon where they are not careful about impurity.

הֱווּ יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּאַהֲבָה וְזֶהוּ מִזְבַּח כַּפָּרָה מִכָּאן לָמַדְנוּ שֶׁאֵין יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּאַהֲבָה אֶלָּא בְּכַפָּרַת חֲטָא וְכָךְ אָמְרוּ
"Be afflictions of love, and this is the altar of atonement. From here we learned that there are no afflictions of love except in the atonement of sin, and so they said."

שם (שם) ביסורין שלאהבה שהן ממרקין כל גופו שלאדם ואין תמרוק ראוי אלא על מירוק עוונות


אוֹ חֲטָאִים וְעוֹד נֶאֱמַר שָׁם (שָׁם ה ב') עַל הַמַּעֲשֶׂה שֶׁאֵרַע לְרַב הוּנָא שֶׁהֶחְמִיץ הַיַּיִן שֶׁלּוֹ
Or sins, and it is also said there (ibid. 5:2) about the incident that happened to Rav Huna that his wine had turned sour.

"ומי חשיד קדוש ברוך הוא דעביד דינא בלא דינא" מלמד שאין רעה באה על האדם בין


בְּגוּפוֹ בֵּין בְּמָמוֹנוֹ אֶלָּא עַל הַדִּין וּלְפִי זֶה אָמְרוּ שָׁם עוֹד כׇּל יִסּוּרִין שֶׁיֵּשׁ בָּהֶן בִּטּוּל
In his body or in his property, but rather on the law; and according to this they said there further: all suffering that includes nullification.

תּוֹרָה אוֹ בִּטּוּל תְּפִלָּה אֵינָן יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּאַהֲבָה וְכֵן אָמְרוּ אִם מְקַבְּלָן עָלָיו מֵאַהֲבָה מָה שְׂכָרוֹ "יִרְאֶה"
Torah or nullification of prayer are not afflictions of love, and so they said: if he accepts them out of love, what is his reward? 'He will see.'

זרע יאריך ימים" ולא עוד אלא שתלמודו מתקיים בידו [שנאמר "וחפץ ה' בידו יצלח"] מפני שאין


אַהֲבָה רְאוּיָה לְהָבִיא עַל הָאָדָם יִסּוּרִין קָשִׁים שֶׁיִּהְיוּ מְבַטְּלִין גּוּפוֹ מֵעֲבוֹדָתוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מִתְּפִלָּה
Love is worthy of bringing upon man harsh sufferings that will cancel his body from the worship of the Holy One, blessed be He, from prayer.

וְתוֹרָה שֶׁאֵין בָּעֳנָשִׁין שֶׁיְּהֵא הָאָדָם אָבֵד בָּהֶם אוֹ נִכְרָת וּשְׁמוֹ נִמְחֶה אֵינָן אֶלָּא יִסּוּרִין שֶׁסּוֹפָן שָׁלוֹם
And a Torah that there is no punishment in it that a person would be lost in it or cut off and his name erased, is not but chastisements whose end is peace.

וְאֵין בָּהֶם אֶלָּא הַכְנָעַת דַּעַת לִשְׁעָה וּבְיִסּוּרִין אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים (בְּרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה סו ה) "צַדִּיקִים תְּחִלָּתָן יִסּוּרִין"
And there is nothing in them but the humbling of the mind for a time and in afflictions the sages said (Genesis Rabbah 60:5) "The righteous begin with afflictions."

וְסוֹפָן שְׁלוֹהָ וּבְפֶרֶק חֵלֶק (סַנְהֶדְרִין ק"א א') אָמְרוּ כְּשֶׁחָלָה רַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר נִכְנְסוּ תַּלְמִידָיו לְנַחֲמוֹ אָמַר לָהֶם
And the end of their peace, and in the chapter of 'Part' (Sanhedrin 101a) they said, when Rabbi Eliezer fell ill, his disciples entered to comfort him, he said to them.

חֵמָה עַזָּה בָּאָה לָעוֹלָם הִתְחִילוּ בּוֹכִין וְרַבִּי עֲקִיבָא מְשַׂחֵק אָמְרוּ לוֹ עֲקִיבָא מִפְּנֵי מָה אַתָּה מְשַׂחֵק
A fierce anger came into the world; they began to weep, and Rabbi Akiva was playing. They said to him, 'Akiva, why are you playing?'

אָמַר לָהֶן מִפְּנֵי מָה אַתֶּם בּוֹכִים אָמְרוּ לוֹ אֶפְשָׁר סֵפֶר תּוֹרָה בְּצַעַר וְלֹא נִבְכֶּה [אָמַר לָהֶם]
He said to them, "Why are you crying?" They said to him, "Is it possible that the Torah scroll is in distress and we will not cry?" [He said to them].

לְכָךְ אֲנִי מְשַׂחֵק שֶׁכׇּל זְמַן שֶׁאֲנִי רוֹאֶה רַבִּי שֶׁאֵין יֵינוֹ מַחְמִיץ וְאֵין פִּשְׁתָּנוֹ לוֹקֶה וְאֵין שַׁמְּנוֹ
For this reason I am playing, because whenever I see Rabbi, his wine does not become sour, his flax is not damaged, and his oil is not spoiled.

מְבָאִישׁ וְאֵין דּוֹבְשָׁנוּ מִדְּבִישׁ אָמַרְתִּי שֶׁמָּא חַס וְשָׁלוֹם קִבֵּל רַבִּי עוֹלָמוֹ וְעַכְשָׁו שֶׁאֲנִי רוֹאֶה רַבִּי בְּצַעַר
From the stench and we are not sweetened from the stench I said perhaps, God forbid, Rabbi accepted his world and now that I see Rabbi in distress.

אֲנִי שָׂמֵחַ אָמַר לוֹ עֲקִיבָה כְּלוּם חָסַרְתִּי מִן הַתּוֹרָה כֻּלָּהּ אָמַר לוֹ לִמַּדְתָּנוּ רַבֵּנוּ "כִּי אָדָם"
Akiva said to him, "I am happy." "Have I not missed anything from the entire Torah?" He said to him, "Our teacher taught us that man."

אֵין צַדִּיק בָּאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה טוֹב וְלֹא יֶחֱטָא" וְעוֹד אָמַר לוֹ בְּפַעַם אַחֶרֶת (סַנְהֶדְרִין ק"י א')
"There is no righteous man on earth who does good and does not sin," and he also said to him on another occasion (Sanhedrin 101a).

"חביבין יסורין" והביא לו ראיה ממנשה שכל טורח שטרח בו אביו לא השיבו למוטב אלא יסורין וכו'


הֲרֵי רַבִּי עֲקִיבָא לֹא נִחֲמוֹ לְרַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר אֶלָּא בְּיִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּמֵרוֹק עֲוֹנוֹת וְאִם יֵשׁ בְּמִדּוֹתָיו שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ
Behold, Rabbi Akiva did not comfort Rabbi Eliezer except with afflictions to purify sins, and if there are in the attributes of the Holy One...

בָּרוּךְ הוּא יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלֹּא חָטָא כְּלָל הֵיאַךְ לֹא נִחֲמוּ בָּהֶן וְכִי מִי הָיָה רָאוּי לְיִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּאַהֲבָה
Blessed is He for the afflictions that he did not sin at all, how they were not comforted in them, and who was worthy of afflictions for love?

וְשֶׁלֹּא חָטָא אֶלָּא רַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר וְעוֹד שֶׁהָיָה רַבִּי עֲקִיבָה תַּלְמִידוֹ וְלֹא בָּא אֶלָּא לְכַבְּדוֹ בְּכׇל כּוֹחוֹ
And that not only Rabbi Eliezer sinned, but also that Rabbi Akiba was his student and he did not come except to honor him with all his strength.

וְהָיָה תּוֹלֶה לוֹ יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלּוֹ לִכְבוֹדוֹ הָא לָמַדְנוּ שֶׁאֵין יִסּוּרִין אֶלָּא לְכַפָּרָה.
And he would attribute his afflictions to his honor; thus we have learned that afflictions are only for atonement.

עוֹד הִזְכִּירוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה דֶּרֶךְ אַחֶרֶת בְּיִסּוּרִין אָמְרוּ (עֶרְכִּין ט"ז ב') תַּנָּא דְּבֵי יִשְׁמָעֵאל כֹּל
Furthermore, the Sages, may their memory be blessed, mentioned another way in suffering, saying (Erchin 16b) that the Tanna of the school of Yishmael said all.

שֶׁעָבְרוּ עָלָיו אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם בְּלֹא יִסּוּרִין קִבֵּל עוֹלָמוֹ רַבִּי וּפֵרוּשׁ הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה הוּא מִן הַמִּקְרִים הַהוֹוִים
that forty days passed over him without afflictions, Rabbi accepted his world, and the explanation of this matter is from the events that happen.

בנוהג שלעולם והבאים על כל אדם כגון שימצא טורח במעשיו לפרקים ויכאב גופו כשיאכל מאכלים שאינן


הַגּוּנִין לוֹ לְפִי טֶבַע שֶׁלּוֹ וְרֹאשׁוֹ כְּשֶׁיַּעֲמֹד לַשֶּׁמֶשׁ וְיִהְיוּ לוֹ מִן הַיְּגִיעוֹת שֶׁבָּאוּ אֲפִלּוּ עַל הַמְּלָכִים
The ones that are beneficial for him according to his nature, and his head when he stands in the sun, and the hardships that come even upon kings.

שֶׁכְּגוֹן אֵלּוּ אֵין נִצָּל מֵהֶן אֶלָּא הָרָשָׁע הַגָּמוּר לְגֵיהִנֹּם שֶׁמְּקַבֵּל עוֹלָמוֹ וְשׁוֹמְרִין אוֹתוֹ מִן הַשָּׁמַיִם לַעֲשׂוֹת
That like these, none is saved from them except the completely wicked to Gehenna, who receives his world and they guard it from the heavens to do.

לֹו כֹּל רְצוֹנוֹ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (תְּהִלִּים י') "יְחִילוּ דְּרָכָיו בְּכָל עֵת" אֲבָל שְׁאַר בְּנֵי אָדָם
If all his desire were in this world, as it is said (Psalms 10) "His ways are always prosperous", but other people.

כֻּלָּם בֵּין צַדִּיקִים בֵּין רְשָׁעִים בִּכְלָל מִנְהָגוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם הֵם וְזֶהוּ שֶׁפֵּרְשׁוּ בַּגְּמָרָא שָׁם בְּעֶרְכִּין עַד הֵיכָן
All of them, whether righteous or wicked, are included in the general custom of the world, and this is what was explained in the Gemara there in Erchin, up to where?

תַּכְלִית יִסּוּרִין כׇּל שֶׁאָרְגוּ לוֹ בֶּגֶד לִלְבּוֹשׁ וְאֵינוֹ מְקֻבָּל עָלָיו וְאַתְקִיפוּ עָלָה וְהֶעֱלוּ אֲפִלּוּ נֶהְפֵּךְ לוֹ
The purpose of suffering is that all that they wove for him a garment to wear, and it is not accepted by him, and they pressed upon it, and they raised even if it was turned over for him.

חַלּוּקוֹ וַאֲפִלּוּ הוֹשִׁיט יָדוֹ לַכִּיס לִטֹּל שָׁלוֹשׁ וְעָלוּ בְיָדוֹ שְׁתַּיִם וְכׇל כָּךְ לָמָּה דְּתָנֵי דְּבֵי רַבִּי
His share, and even if he reached his hand into the purse to take three and two came up in his hand, and why is that? Because it was taught in the house of Rabbi.

יִשְׁמָעֵאל כֹּל שֶׁעָבְרוּ עָלָיו וְכוּ' וְזֶה עִנְיָן אַחֵר הוּא אֵינוֹ מִן הַיִּסּוּרִין שֶׁמִּשְׁתַּנִּין בָּהֶם בְּנֵי אָדָם
Yishmael all that passed over him etc., and this is another matter; it is not from the afflictions that change in them the sons of men.

זֶה מִזֶּה בָּרֹב אֲבָל בְּיִסּוּרִין מַמָּשׁ לֹא לָמַדְנוּ בָּהֶן יִסּוּרִין אֶלָּא לְכַפָּרָה.
This from that in the majority, but in afflictions truly we did not learn in them afflictions, but for atonement.

וְאִם תִּשְׁאַל וְתֹאמַר הֲלֹא מְפֹרָשׁ בַּתּוֹרָה שֶׁיֵּשׁ יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּנִסָּיוֹן כְּגוֹן "וְהָאֱלֹהִים נִסָּה אֶת אַבְרָהָם" (בְּרֵאשִׁית כב)
And if you ask and say, is it not explicit in the Torah that there are afflictions of trial, such as "And God tested Abraham" (Genesis 22)?

וְכֵן "לְמַעַן עַנּוֹתְךָ לְנַסּוֹתְךָ לְדַעַת אֶת אֲשֶׁר בְּלִבְּבָךְ תִּשְׁמֹר מִצְוֹתָיו אִם לֹא" (דְּבָרִים ח טז) תְּשׁוּבָה
And likewise, 'In order to test you, to know what is in your heart, whether you will keep His commandments or not' (Deuteronomy 8:16) is an answer.

לִשְׁאֵלָה זוֹ כָּךְ הַדָּבָר וְכָךְ הִיא הַמִּדָּה שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מְנַסֶּה וְלֹא כׇּל אָדָם אֶלָּא מְנַסֶּה
For this question, thus is the matter and thus is the measure that the Holy One, blessed be He, tests, not every person but tests.

הוּא אֶת חֲסִידָיו שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (תְּהִלִּים י"א) "ה' צַדִּיק יִבְחַן" וְכֵן דָּרְשׁוּ בְּבֵרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה (פָּרָשָׁה נ"ה ב)
He, as it is said (Psalms 11) "The Lord, the righteous one, will test," and so they interpreted in Bereishit Rabbah (chapter 55b).

הַיּוֹצֵר הַזֶּה כְּשֶׁהוּא בּוֹדֵק אֶת כַּבְשׁוֹנוֹ אֵינוֹ [בּוֹדֵק קַנְקַנִּים מְרֻעָעִים שֶׁאֵינוֹ מַסְפִּיק לְהַקִּישׁ אַחַת עָלָיו עַד]
This creator, when he inspects his furnace, does not [inspect broken vessels that he is not able to strike one upon it until].

שֶׁהוּא שׁוֹבְרוֹ וּבְמִי הוּא בּוֹדֵק בְּקַנְקַנִּים יָפִים שֶׁאֲפִלּוּ מַקִּישׁ עֲלֵיהֶם כַּמָּה פְּעָמִים אֵינָן נִשְׁבָּרוֹת כָּךְ אֵין
that he breaks it and in whom is he examining in beautiful jars that even if he knocks on them many times they are not broken, so there is none.

הקדוש ברוך הוא מנסה את הרשעים שאינן יכולין לעמוד ואת מי הוא מנסה את הצדיקים שנאמר "ה'


צַדִּיק יְבַחֵן" וְכָתִיב "וְהָאֱלֹהִים נָסָה אֶת אַבְרָהָם" וּמַהוּ הַנִּסָּיוֹן הַזֶּה שֶׁיָּבִיא עָלָיו בַּעֲבוֹדָתוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ
"A righteous person will be tested," and it is written, "And God tested Abraham," and what is this test that will bring upon him in the service of the Holy One, blessed be He.

הוּא וּבְעֲשִׂיַּת מִצְוֹתָיו טוֹרֵחַ לְפִי שֶׁיֵּשׁ בְּנֵי אָדָם שֶׁעוֹשִׂין מִצְוֹת וּמַעֲשִׂים טוֹבִים כְּשֶׁיָּדָם מַשִּׂיגָה וּכְשֶׁהֵן בְּשַׁלְוָה
He works hard in performing his commandments, because there are people who do commandments and good deeds when they have the opportunity, and when they are at peace.

וְרִיּוּחַ אֲבָל מִתּוֹךְ הַדּוֹחֵק כְּשֶׁהָעֲבוֹדָה בָּאָה עֲלֵיהֶם בְּטוֹרַח וּבְעָמָל אֵינָן עוֹשִׂין לְפִיכָךְ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מַטְרִיחַ
And relief, but from the pressure when the work comes upon them with toil and labor they do not do, therefore the Holy One, blessed be He, troubles.

עַל יְרֵאָיו בִּקְצָת הַנִּסָּיוֹן כְּדֵי שֶׁיְּקַבְּלוּ מִצְוֹת וְיַעֲשׂוּ אוֹתָם מִתּוֹךְ הַטֹּרַח כְּדֵי שֶׁיְּהֵא שְׂכָרָם בְּאוֹתָן מִצְוֹת
About His pious ones in a little of the trial, so that they will receive commandments and do them out of toil, so that their reward will be in those commandments.

כָּפוּל וּמְכֻפָּל וְלָמָּה מְנַסֶּה אוֹתָם וַהֲלֹא גָּלוּי וְיָדוּעַ לְפָנָיו יִתְבָּרֵךְ אִם יְקַבֵּל אוֹתוֹ חָסִיד הַמְּנֻסֶּה עֲבוֹדָה
Doubled and redoubled, and why does He test them? Is it not known and revealed before Him that if the pious person who is tested accepts it, he will be a servant of God.

זֶה אַף עַל פִּי כֵן אֵין שְׂכַר הָאָדָם בְּכֹחַ אֱמוּנָה שֶׁלּוֹ כְּשַׂכְרוֹ בְּפֹעַל מַעֲשֶׂה וְנִמְצָא מְזַכֶּה
This, even though, is not the reward of a person in the power of his faith as his reward in the act of doing, and it is found that he justifies.

וְטוֹרֵחַ אוֹתוֹ לְהוֹצִיא דַּרְכָּיו הַטּוֹבִים לְפֹעַל וּלְמַעֲשֶׂה וְלָמָּה נִקְרָא "נִסָּיוֹן" וְהֲלֹא הַכֹּל צָפוּי לְפָנָיו יִתְבָּרֵךְ וְאַף
And he labors to bring out his good ways into action and deed, and why is it called a "test"? And isn't everything foreseen before Him, may He be blessed, and even...

על פי כן רשות האדם בידו אם ירצה יעשה ואם לא ירצה לא יעשה נמצא אותו


חֲסִיד הַמִּצְוָה מְנֻסֶּה עַל מִצְוָה זוֹ בְּוַדַּאי לְפִיכָךְ נִקְרָא "נִסָּיוֹן" מִצַּד הָעוֹשֶׂה וְלֹא מִצַּד הַמִּצְוָה יִתְבָּרֵךְ שְׁמוֹ.
The pious person who is tested on this commandment is certainly called a "trial" from the side of the doer and not from the side of the commandment, may His name be blessed.

מידה זו מידת הטוב היא אינה מידת נקמה ופורענות שהוא מנסה מי שהוא גלוי לפניו שימצא


שָׁלֵם בְּאוֹתוֹ נִסָּיוֹן כְּדֵי לְהַרְבּוֹת לוֹ שָׂכָר שֶׁאָמַרְנוּ וּלְפִיכָךְ נִתְנַסָּה אַבְרָהָם כְּדֵי שֶׁיְּקַבֵּל עֲבוֹדָה זוֹ הַחֲמוּרָה
He completed in that trial in order to increase his reward that we said, and therefore Abraham was tested in order to accept this severe work.

וִיהֶא שְׂכָרוֹ קַיָּם לְעוֹלָם שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (בְּרֵאשִׁית כב טז) "וַיֹּאמֶר בִּי נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי נְאֻם ה' כִּי יַעַן אֲשֶׁר"
"And may his reward be permanent forever, as it is said (Genesis 22:16) 'And He said, 'By Myself I have sworn,' says the Lord, 'because you have done this...'"

עָשִׂיתָ אֶת הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה וְגוֹ' וּלְפִיכָךְ נִתְנַסּוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל כְּדֵי שֶׁיִּהְיוּ מְקַבְּלִין טוֹרַח הֲלִיכוֹת הַמִּדְבָּרוֹת וּפַחַד הַמִּקְרִים
You did that thing, etc., and therefore Israel was tested so that they would endure the hardships of wandering in the desert and the fear of the events.

לְשֵׁמוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא וּלְתוֹרָתוֹ וְיִטְּלוּ שָׂכָר עַל הַדָּבָר שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (דְּבָרִים ח ב) וְזָכַרְתָּ אֶת
For the sake of the Holy One, blessed be He, and for His Torah, and they will receive a reward for the matter that is said (Deuteronomy 8:2) and you shall remember.

כֹּל הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר הוֹלִיכְךָ ה' אֱלֹהֶיךָ זֶה אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה בַּמִּדְבָּר לְמַעַן עַנּוֹתְךָ לְנַסּוֹתְךָ לָדַעַת אֶת אֲשֶׁר בְּלִבְּבָךְ
All the way that the Lord your God led you these forty years in the wilderness, in order to test you, to try you, to know what is in your heart.

ואומר (ירמיהו ב ב) "זכרתי לך חסד נעוריך אהבת כלולותיך לכתך אחרי במדבר בארץ לא זרועה"


נִמְצָא הַנִּסָּיוֹן הַזֶּה מִדָּה טוֹבָה שֶׁהָאָדָם מְקַבֵּל בּוֹ שָׂכָר וּשְׁמוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מִתְעַלֶּה בְּכָךְ לְהוֹדִיעַ
It is found that this trial is a good measure that the person receives a reward in it, and the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, is elevated by this to inform.

עַד הֵיכָן הִגִּיעַ אַהֲבָתוֹ וְיִרְאָתוֹ בְּלֵב עֲבָדָיו וְהֵיאַךְ נִמְשְׁכוּ אַחַר מִצְוֹתָיו וְעוֹשִׂין רְצוֹנוֹ כִּרְצוֹנָם.
To what extent did his love and fear reach in the hearts of his servants, and how were they drawn after his commandments, and they do his will as their own will.

וְאִם תֹּאמַר וְהֲלֹא חִזְקִיָּהוּ נִתְנַסָּה וְלֹא עָמַד בְּנִסְיוֹנוֹ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (דברי הימים ב לב) "וְכֵן שָׂרֵי בָּבֶל"
And if you say, 'But didn't Hezekiah undergo a trial and not stand in his trial, as it is said (2 Chronicles 32:31) "And so the princes of Babylon"?'

הַמְּשַׁלְּחִים עָלָיו לִדְרֹשׁ הַמּוֹפֵת אֲשֶׁר הָיָה בָּאָרֶץ עָזְבוּ הָאֱלֹהִים לְנַסּוֹתוֹ לָדַעַת כֹּל בְּמִלִּיצִי בְּלִבּוֹ " מֵעוֹלָם
Those who sent him to investigate the miracle that was in the land abandoned God to test him, to know everything in his heart from the beginning.

לֹא נָסָה הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְאוֹתוֹ צַדִּיק וְלֹא בָּקַשׁ מִמֶּנּוּ דָּבָר אֶלָּא הוּא בְּרִשְׁיוּת עַצְמוֹ חָטָא
The Holy One, blessed be He, did not test that righteous man nor ask anything of him, but rather he sinned of his own volition.

זֶהוּ שֶׁכָּתוּב "עָזְבוּ הָאֱלֹהִים לְנַסּוֹתוֹ" לֹמַר שֶׁלֹּא עָשָׂה עִמּוֹ נֵס וְלֹא סִיְּעוֹ בְּאוֹתוֹ עִנְיָן כְּמוֹ שֶׁעָשָׂה
This is what is written "The gods abandoned him to test him" to say that he did not perform a miracle for him and did not assist him in that matter as he did.

עִמּוֹ בְּסַנְחֵרִיב וּבִרְפוּאַת חֲלָיו וְעָזְבוּ לְעַצְמוֹ מִפְּנֵי שֶׁחָטָא בִּרְפוּאָתוֹ כְּמוֹ שֶׁכָּתוּב "וְלֹא כַּגְּמוּל עָלָיו הֵשִׁיב יְחִזְקִיָּה".
He was with him in Sennacherib and in the healing of his illness, and they abandoned him to himself because he sinned in his healing, as it is written, "And not as a reward for him did Hezekiah return."

כִּי גָּבַהּ לִבּוֹ לְפִיכָךְ הִנִּיחוֹ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עַכְשָׁו לִרְשׁוּת עַצְמוֹ וְגָבַהּ לְבַבּוֹ וְנִכְשָׁל וְזֶהוּ כְּעִנְיָן
Because his heart was high, therefore the Holy One, blessed be He, left him now to his own devices and his heart grew high and he stumbled, and this is like the matter of...

בָּא לִטַּמָּא פּוֹתְחִין לוֹ, בָּא לְהִטַּהֵר מְסַיְּעִין אוֹתוֹ (יוֹמָא ל"ח ב').
If one comes to become impure, they open the way for him; if one comes to become pure, they assist him.

בְּמִדָּה הַזֹּאת נָהַג הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עִם יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּכְנִיסָתָן לָאָרֶץ הֵם חָטְאוּ וְלֹא רָצוּ לְהוֹרִישׁ יוֹשְׁבֵי
In this measure, the Holy One, blessed be He, dealt with Israel upon their entry into the land: they sinned and did not wish to dispossess the inhabitants.

הארץ שנאמר (שופטים ב ב) "ואתם לא תכרתו ברית ליושבי הארץ הזאת מזבחותיהם תתוצון ולא שמעתם


בְּקוֹלִי מָה זֹאת עֲשִׂיתֶם" וּכְתִיב (שָׁם) "גַּם אֲנִי לֹא אוֹסִיף לְהוֹרִישׁ אִישׁ מִפְּנֵיהֶם מִן הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר
"In my voice, what is this that you have done?" and it is written (there) "I will also not add to dispossess a man from before them from the nations which".

עָזַב יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וָמֵת לְמַעַן נַסּוֹת בָּם אֶת יִשְׂרָאֵל הַשּׁוֹמְרִים הֵם אֶת דֶּרֶךְ ה' לָלֶכֶת בָּם" וְכָתִיב
Joshua left and died in order to test Israel, who kept the way of the Lord to walk in it, and it is written.

(שופטים ג ד) "ויהיו לנסות בם את ישראל לדעת הישמעו את מצות ה'" הם חטאו ולא


הוֹרִישׁוּ אוֹתָם וְכָרְתוּ לָהֶם בְּרִית וְהוּא לֹא רָצָה לַעֲשׂוֹת עִמָּם נֵס לִהְיוֹת אִישׁ אֶחָד מֵהֶם רוֹדֵף
They bequeathed them and cut a covenant with them, and he did not want to do a miracle with them, so that one of them would be a pursuer.

אָלֶף כַּאֲשֶׁר בַּתְּחִלָּה וְנִתְנַסּוּ בַּדָּבָר וְנִכְשְׁלוּ וְהַנִּסָּיוֹן הַזֶּה לֹא בְּחֶפְצוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא נַעֲשָׂה אֶלָּא
"Alf when at first and they were tested in the matter and failed, and this test was not done by the will of the Holy One, blessed be He, but rather..."

הוּא עוֹמֵד וּמְשַׁלֵּחַ לָהֶם לְהוֹרִישָׁם וְהֵם לֹא שָׁמְעוּ וְכֵן זֶה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בַּמָּן (שְׁמוֹת טז ד) "הַנֶּנִּי"
He stands and sends them to dispossess them, and they did not listen; and so it is said of the manna (Exodus 16:4) "Behold, I am giving you bread from heaven."

מַמְטִיר לָכֶם לֶחֶם מִן הַשָּׁמַיִם וְיָצָא הָעָם וְלָקְטוּ דָּבָר יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ לְמַעַן אֲנַסֶּנּוּ הֲיֵלֵךְ בְּתוֹרָתִי אִם לֹא
From the sky He rains down bread for you, and the people go out and gather it, a portion for each day, in order to test you, whether you will follow my law or not.

אין הניסיון לישראל אלא מידת רחמים שיהא מזונם יורד להם דבר יום ביומו ויוצאין למדבר הגדול


וְהַנּוֹרָא בְּלֹא מְחִיָּה וּבוֹטְחִים בַּהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא וּבִנְבִיאוֹ וְזֶהוּ שֶׁכָּתוּב (דברים ח טז) "הַמַּאֲכִילְךָ מִן בַּמִּדְבָּר"
And the awesome one without life, and they trust in the Holy One, blessed be He, and in His prophet, and this is what is written (Deuteronomy 8:16) "He who feeds you from the wilderness."

אֲשֶׁר לֹא יָדְעוּן אֲבוֹתֶיךָ לְמַעַן עַנּוֹתְךָ וּלְמַעַן נַסּוֹתְךָ [לְהֵיטִיבְךָ] בְּאַחֲרִיתְךָ" הָא לָמַדְנוּ שֶׁאֵין הַנִּסָּיוֹן הַזֶּה לְהָבִיא
"which your fathers did not know, in order to test you and to try you [to benefit you] in the end." We have learned that this trial is not to bring.

עַל הָאָדָם יִסּוּרִין שֶׁיָּמוּת בָּהֶן אוֹ שֶׁיְּהֵא כׇּל יָמָיו בְּצַעַר וּבְשֶׁת וּבְטַל מִלַּעֲבֹד אֱלֹהִים וּמִלַּעֲסֹק בְּתוֹרָתוֹ
On man there are afflictions that he will die in them, or that all his days will be in sorrow and shame and idle from serving God and from engaging in His Torah.

אֶלָּא טֹרַח שֶׁסּוֹפוֹ הַנָּחָה וְעָמָל שֶׁסּוֹפוֹ שִׂמְחָה וְשָׁלוֹם כׇּל שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁאֵין בְּנִסָּיוֹן יִסּוּרִין שֶׁיְּהֵא בָּהֶן מְחִיקַת
But a toil whose end is rest, and labor whose end is joy and peace, all the more so that there are no trials in which there is erasure.

שֵׁם וְאַבֶּדֶן הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה לְפִיכָךְ אֵין הַנִּסָּיוֹן בִּכְלַל יִסּוּרִין לֹא יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּכַפָּרָה וְלֹא יִסּוּרִין שֶׁלְּאַהֲבָה אֵינוֹ
The name and destruction of this world; therefore, the trial is not in the category of afflictions, neither for atonement nor for love.

אֶלָּא מִדַּת הַטּוֹב מְרֻבָּה.
But the measure of good is greater.

כְּדֶרֶךְ שֶׁיֵּשׁ בַּצַּדִּיקִים דְּרָכִים הַרְבֵּה לְכַפָּרָה כָּךְ יֵשׁ בָּרְשָׁעִים יֵשׁ שֶׁתּוֹלִין לוֹ לְהַאֲבִידוֹ כְּדֵי לִתֵּן שָׂכָר
As there are many ways in the righteous for atonement, so there are in the wicked; there are those who attribute to him to destroy him in order to give him reward.

מִעוּט מַעֲשִׂים טוֹבִים שֶׁעָשָׂה כְּמוֹ שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ וְיֵשׁ שֶׁפּוֹסְקִים לוֹ חַיִּים וְשַׁלְוָה לְחֶסֶד אֲבוֹתָיו כְּעִנְיָן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר (מְלָכִים בּ').
"Because of the few good deeds he did, as we have explained, and some attribute to him life and peace due to the mercy of his ancestors, as in the matter that is said (in Kings II)."

י ל) "בְּנֵי רְבָעִים יֵשְׁבוּ לְךָ עַל כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל" וְיֵשׁ שֶׁמַּאֲרִיכִין לוֹ עַד שֶׁיָּשׁוּב בִּתְשׁוּבָה כַּדֶּרֶךְ
Y L) "The sons of the fourth generation will sit for you on the throne of Israel" and there are those who prolong it until he returns in repentance as the way.

שֶׁעָשָׂה מְנַשֶּׁה וּמִן הַגְּאוֹנִים אוֹמְרִים שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא פּוֹסֵק שַׁלְוָה לָרְשָׁעִים לְנַסּוֹת בָּהֶם אַנְשֵׁי הָרֶשַׁע וְהַתַּרְמִית
What Manasseh did, and some of the Geonim say that the Holy One, blessed be He, gives tranquility to the wicked to test them with men of wickedness and deceit.

שֶׁיִּהְיוּ מַחְזִיקִין בָּרָשָׁעָן וְאוֹמְרִים "הִנֵּה אֵלֶּה רְשָׁעִים וְשַׁלְוֵי עוֹלָם הִשִּׂיגוּ חַיִל (תְּהִלִּים ע"ג) אַךְ שָׁוְא עָבוֹד".
That they hold on to the wicked and say, "Behold, these are the wicked and the peaceful of the world have achieved wealth (Psalms 73), but it is in vain."

אֱלֹהִים וּמָה בֶּצַע כִּי שָׁמַרְנוּ מִשְׁמַרְתּוֹ וּבָרוּךְ יוֹדֵעַ הָאֱמֶת.
God, and what is the use since we kept his guard? And blessed is he who knows the truth.

וְאִם תִּשְׁאַל וְתֹאמַר הֲרֵי שֶׁתָּקְנוּ חֲכָמִים דְּבָרִים הַלָּלוּ לְפִי קַבָּלָתָם וּלְפִי הֶכְרֵחַ פְּסוּקֵי הַתּוֹרָה וְהַנְּבִיאִים אִם
and if you ask and say, behold, the Sages have fixed these matters according to their tradition and according to the necessity of the verses of the Torah and the Prophets, if

כֵּן מַהוּ זֶה שֶׁהַנְּבִיאִים צוֹוְחִים עַל הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה וּמַהוּ שֶׁתָּמַהּ יִרְמְיָהוּ (י"ב) עַל הָרְשָׁעִים (יִרְמְיָהוּ י"ב א)
Yes, what is this that the prophets are crying out about this matter, and what is it that Jeremiah (12) wondered about the wicked (Jeremiah 12:1)?

צַדִּיק אַתָּה ה' כִּי אָרִיב אֵלֶיךָ מַדּוּעַ דֶּרֶךְ רְשָׁעִים צָלְחָה שָׁלוֹ כׇּל בּוֹגְדֵי בֶּגֶד" וְאָמַר [דָּוִד]
You are righteous, O Lord, because I contend with You: why do the ways of the wicked prosper? All the traitors betray, and they are at peace. And said [David]

(תהלים עג יב) "אַךְ רֵיק זִכִּיתִי לְבָבִי וְאֶרְחַץ בְּנִקְיוֹן כַּפָּי" וגו' וְתָמַהּ יְשַׁעְיָהוּ (סג יז) עַל
(Psalms 73:12) "But I have been empty of heart, and I will wash my hands in innocence," etc., and Isaiah (63:17) wondered about it.

הַצַּדִּיקִים "לָמָּה תִתְעַנּוּ ה' מִדְּרָכֶיךָ תַּקְשִׁיחַ לִבֵּנוּ מִיִּרְאָתֶךָ" וְאָמַר חֲבַקּוּק עַל שְׁנֵיהֶם (א ג) "לָמָּה תִּרְאֵנִי"
The righteous ones "Why do you afflict us, O Lord, from Your ways? You harden our heart from Your fear" and Habakkuk said about both of them (1:3) "Why do you see me?"

און ועמל תביט שוד וחמס לנגדי" וכתיב "כי רשע מכתיר את הצדיק על כן יצא משפט מעוקל"


וְנִתּוֹכְחוּ אִיּוֹב וַחֲבֵרָיו עַל זֶה הַרְבֵּה וַחֲכָמֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה אָמְרוּ "אָנוּ אֵין בְּיָדֵינוּ שַׁלְוַת רְשָׁעִים וְאַף"
And they argued, Job and his friends, about this much, and our sages, may their memory be blessed, said: "We have no peace of the wicked in our hands, and even..."

לֹא מִיסוּרִים שֶׁלַּצַּדִּיקִים
Not the afflictions of the righteous.

דַּע שֶׁיֵּשׁ מֵרַבּוֹתֵינוּ הַחֲלוּקִין בְּזוֹ הַמִּדָּה יֵשׁ מֵהֶם מִי שֶׁאוֹמֵר "אֵין מִיתָה בְּלֹא חֲטָא וְלֹא יִסּוּרִין".
Know that there are among our sages who disagree on this measure; some of them say, "There is no death without sin and no affliction."

בְּלֹא עֲוֹן (שַׁבָּת נ"ה א) וְנִדְחֻוּוּ בְּדָבָרָיו בַּגְּמָרָא בְּ"אֵין מִיתָה בְּלֹא חֲטָא" שֶׁיֵּשׁ מֵהֶן שֶׁמֵּתוּ בְּעִטְיוֹ
"without sin" (Shabbat 55a) and were rejected in his words in the Gemara in "there is no death without sin" that some of them died because of him.

שֶׁלַּנָּחָשׁ הַקַּדְמוֹנִי וְהוּא חֲטָאוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם הָרִאשׁוֹן שֶׁנִּגְזְרָה מִיתָה עָלָיו וְעַל תּוֹלְדוֹתָיו בִּשְׁבִיל חֲטָאוֹ כְּעִנְיָן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בְּעֵלִי
Of the ancient serpent and his sin, of the first man, upon whom and upon his descendants death was decreed because of his sin, as in the matter that is said about Eli.

וּבְבֵיתוֹ אֲבָל בְּ"אֵין יִסּוּרִין בְּלֹא עֲוֹן" לֹא נִדְחוּ דְּבָרָיו וְאִם תֹּאמַר שֶׁנִּדְחוּ בְּכֹל אֲבָל הַמִּיתָה וְהַיִּסּוּרִין
And in his house, but in "there are no afflictions without sin" his words were not rejected, and if you say that they were rejected in everything, but death and afflictions.

בָּאִין עַל חֲטָא שֶׁקָּדַם לָאָב כְּמוֹ עֲטָיו שֶׁל נָחָשׁ שֶׁהִזְכִּיר הַמַּקְשֶׁה אֲבָל אֵין מִיתָה וְיִסּוּרִין חִנָּם
They come upon a sin that preceded the father, like the snake's sting that the questioner mentioned, but there is no death and suffering for free.

לְעוֹלָם וְאָמְרוּ בִּבְרָכוֹת (ז א') בָּקַשׁ מֹשֶׁה לְהוֹדִיעוֹ דְּרָכָיו וְנָתַן לוֹ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "הוֹדִיעֵנִי נָא אֶת דְּרָכֶיךָ".
Forever and they said in Berakhot (7a) that Moses sought to inform him of his ways and he gave him that which is said "Show me, I pray, your ways."

אָמַר לְפָנָיו רִבּוֹנוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם מִפְּנֵי מָה יֵשׁ צַדִּיק וְטוֹב לוֹ צַדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ רָשָׁע וְטוֹב לוֹ
He said before Him, Master of the Universe: Why is there a righteous man who is good, a righteous man who is bad, and a wicked man who is good?

רָשָׁע וְרַע לוֹ אָמַר לוֹ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְמֹשֶׁה צַדִּיק וְטוֹב לוֹ צַדִּיק גָּמוּר צַדִּיק וְרַע
A wicked person and it is bad for him. The Holy One, blessed be He, said to Moses: A righteous person and it is good for him. A completely righteous person, righteous and bad.

לו צַדִּיק שֶׁאֵינוֹ גָּמוּר רָשָׁע וְטוֹב לוֹ רָשָׁע שֶׁאֵינוֹ גָּמוּר רָשָׁע וְרַע לוֹ רָשָׁע גָּמוּר וְזֶה
If a righteous person is not fully righteous, he is wicked, and it is good for him. If a wicked person is not fully wicked, it is bad for him. If a fully wicked person, and this.

הָעִנְיָן עַל הַדֶּרֶךְ שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ לְמַעְלָה בְּפִרְעוֹן קְצָת הָעֲוֹנוֹת בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה לְזַכּוֹתָן לְגַמְרֵי אוֹ לְהַאֲבִידוֹ לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא
The matter concerning the way we explained above about the repayment of some sins in this world, to fully justify them or to destroy them in the next world.

וְלָשׁוֹן אַחֵר אָמְרוּ צַדִּיק וְטוֹב לוֹ צַדִּיק בֵּן צַדִּיק צַדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ צַדִּיק בֵּן רָשָׁע וְכוּ'.
And another language said: A righteous man and good for him, a righteous man son of a righteous man, a righteous man and bad for him, a righteous man son of a wicked man, etc.

וְאָמַר בַּגְּמָרָא וּפְלִיגָא דְּרַבִּי מֵאִיר דְּתָנָא מִשְּׁמֵיהּ דְּרַבִּי מֵאִיר שֶׁלֹּא נָתְנוּ לוֹ לְמֹשֶׁה זֶה הַמִּדָּה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר
And it is said in the Gemara, and it is disputed by Rabbi Meir, that it is taught in the name of Rabbi Meir that they did not give to Moses this measure that is said.

"וְחָנַנְתִּי אֶת אֲשֶׁר אֶחְנֹן" אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁאֵינוֹ הָגוּן "וְרִחַמְתִּי אֶת אֲשֶׁר אֶרְחָם" אַף עַל פִּי
"And I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy" even though he is not worthy, "and I will show compassion on whom I will show compassion" even though.

שֶׁאֵינוֹ הָגוּן כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁאֵינוֹ הָגוּן לְדַעַת בְּנֵי אָדָם לוֹמַר שֶׁלֹּא נִמְסְרָה הַמִּדָּה הַזּוֹ לְדַעְתּוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם וְהִנֵּה
That which is not proper, that is, that which is not proper in the opinion of people, to say that this measure was not given to his opinion of man, and behold.

כְּפִי הַסְּבָרָה הָרִאשׁוֹנָה הַכֹּל בְּטַעַם יָדוּעַ וּבִטְעָנָה מוּשֶׂגֶת וְזֶה שֶׁאוֹמְרִים הַנְּבִיאִים בַּדָּבָר וּמָה שֶׁצּוֹוְחִין עַל הָעִנְיָן
According to the first assumption, everything is in a known taste and a comprehensible claim, and this is what the prophets say about the matter and what they shout about the issue.

אֵינוֹ אֶלָּא כְּדִבְרֵי הַחוֹלֶה שֶׁמִּצְטַעֵר עַל חֳלִיּוֹ וּמַפְלִיג עַל חֶזְקַת הַחוֹלִי וְצוֹעֵק עַל תּוֹקֶף הַצַּעַר וְהַכְּאֵב
It is nothing but the words of a sick person who laments his illness, exaggerates the severity of the disease, and cries out about the intensity of the pain and suffering.

וְהֵיאַךְ אֵרַע לוֹ כָּךְ וְהֵיאַךְ אֶפְשָׁר עִנְיַן צַעֲרוֹ הַגָּדוֹל כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁהַנְּבִיאִים מִתְמַהִּין לִפְנֵי הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא
And how did this happen to him? And how could his great sorrow be possible? That is, that the prophets are amazed before the Holy One, blessed be He.

וְאוֹמְרִים לְפָנָיו רִבּוֹנוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם לָמָּה תִּתְנַהֵג בְּזוֹ הַמִּדָּה וְנִבְלֶה יָמֵינוּ בְּבֶהָלָה וְאֵלֶּה הָרְשָׁעִים שֶׁפָּשְׁטוּ יְדֵיהֶם בַּזְּבוּל
And they say before Him, Master of the Universe, why do You act in this manner, and our days are wasted in panic, and these wicked ones who have extended their hands in the Zvul.

קִדְּשְׁךָ בְּשָׁלוֹם וּבְשַׁלְוָה בָּעוֹלָם וְאַף עַל פִּי שֶׁיּוֹדְעִין שֶׁהַמִּדָּה אֱמֶת וְהַמִּשְׁפָּט צֶדֶק וּבִתְשׁוּבַת דָּבָר זֶה אָמַר
You sanctified him in peace and tranquility in the world, and even though they know that the measure is true and the judgment is just, in the answer to this matter he said.

הַמְּשׁוֹרֵר לְאַחַר שֶׁהִתְאוֹנֵן עַל הָעִנְיָן וְאָמַר (תְּהִלִּים עג)
The poet after he lamented about the matter and said (Psalms 73)

אָנֹכִי כִּמְעַט נָטוּ רַגְלִי כְּאֵין שָׁפְכָה אֲשׁוּרִי כִּי קִנֵּאתִי בַּהוֹלְלִים שָׁלוֹם רְשָׁעִים אֶרְאֶה וְגָמַר הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה
I almost slipped my feet as if there was none, my heart was poured out, because I envied the wicked who have peace, and I saw it, and this matter is finished.

בְּסִפְקַת הָרָשָׁע וְטוֹב לוֹ וְעוֹד אָמַר בְּסִפְקַת צַדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ "לָכֵן יָשׁוּב עִמּוֹ הָלוּם וּמִי מָלֵא"
In the prosperity of the wicked and it is good for him, and he also said in the prosperity of the righteous and it is bad for him: "Therefore he will return with him, and who will fill..."

יִמְצוּ לָמוֹ" "אַךְ רֵיק זָכִיתִי לִבִּי וְאֶרְחַץ בְּנִקְיוֹן כַּפִּי וָהָיִיתִי נָגוּעַ כׇּל הַיּוֹם" וְחָזַר וְתֵרֵץ עַל
"They will find for him" "But I have found my heart empty and I will wash my hands in purity and I was afflicted all day" and he returned and explained on.

הַכֹּל "וְאֶחְשְׁבָה לָדַעַת זֹאת עָמָל הוּא בְּעֵינַי עַד אָבוֹא אֶל מִקְדָּשִׁי אֶל אָבִינָה לְאַחֲרִיתָם" כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁשָּׁתִיתִי
Everything "and I thought to know this, it is labor in my eyes until I come to my temple, to my father, to their end" that is, I drank.

סְפִיקוֹת הָאֵלֶּה עָמָל גָּדוֹל הָיָה לוֹ בְּמַחְשַׁבְתּוֹ הָרִאשׁוֹנָה עַד שֶׁבָּא בְּמַחְשָׁבָה אֶל מִקְדְּשֵׁי הָאֱלֹהִים וְהוּא מָה
These doubts were a great labor for him in his first thought, until he came in thought to the temples of God, and what was it?

שֶׁהִקְדִּישׁ לִשְׁתֵּי כְּתוֹת הָאֵלֶּה שֶׁל צַדִּיקִים וְרֵשָׁעִים וְהִזְמִין לִשְׁתֵּיהֶן וְהֵבִין לְאַחֲרִיתָם וְרָמַז שָׁם עִנְיַן הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא בַּפָּסוּק
that he dedicated to these two groups of the righteous and the wicked and invited both of them and understood their end and hinted there the matter of the world to come in the verse.

בְּעֶצְתְּךָ תַּנְחֵנִי וְאַחַר כָּבוֹד תִּקָּחֵנִי וְעִנְיַן הַכֶּרֶתָה בְּ"אֵיךְ הָיוּ לְשִׁמָּה כְּרֶגַע סָפוּ תַּמּוּ מִן בִּלְהוֹת" וּשְׁאַר הָעִנְיָן.
By your counsel you will guide me, and after glory you will take me; and the matter of her destruction in "How they were for ruin in a moment, they perished, they ceased from terrors" and the rest of the matter.

וִישׁ מֵרַבּוֹתֵינוּ אוֹמְרִים וְהוּא דַּעַת רַבִּי מֵאִיר בַּבָּרַיְתָא שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁהַמִּדּוֹת הַלָּלוּ הֵם כְּמוֹ
And some of our sages say, and it is the opinion of Rabbi Meir in the baraita that we mentioned, even though these measures are like...

שֶׁסָּבַרְנוּ וּמִקְצָת בְּנֵי אָדָם נִדּוֹנִין בָּהֶם אֲבָל עֲדַיִן יֵשׁ צַדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים מִתְיַסְּרִין שֶׁלֹּא כָּךְ בְּדֶרֶךְ הַמִּדּוֹת
That we thought and some people are judged by them, but still there are completely righteous people who suffer not in that way in the path of the attributes.

הללו ורשעים גמורים שיושבין שאנן ושקט בעולם ואלו הן תוכחותיו שלאיוב הצדיק שבאו יסורין עליו שלא


עַל חֵטְא כְּפִי דַּעְתּוֹ וּכְפִי מָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר עָלָיו בְּעִנְיַן הַשָּׂטָן שֶׁלֹּא הֻזְכַּר עָלָיו חֵטְא כְּלָל אֶלָּא
On a sin according to his opinion and according to what was said about him in the matter of the Satan, that no sin was mentioned about him at all, but...

הַחִנָּם יָרֵא אִיּוֹב אֱלֹהִים" וְגָמַר הָעִנְיָן וְאִם נֹאמַר בְּאִיּוֹב שׁוּם עֲלִילָה אוֹ נְחַפֵּשׂ בְּעִנְיָנוֹ שֶׁמֶץ דָּבָר
"Job feared God for free" and the matter is concluded, and if we say about Job some accusation or we search in his matter some hint of something.

מִכׇּל מָקוֹם הוּא שׁוֹאֵל עַל הַצַּדִּיק הַגָּמוּר מִכׇּל צַד שֶׁבָּאוּ עָלָיו יִסּוּרִין וּמֵת בָּהֶן וְאָבַד שְׁמוֹ
In any case, he asks about the completely righteous person from every side that afflictions came upon him and he died in them and his name was lost.

עַל לֹא חָמַס בְּכַפָּיו הֵיאַךְ יִתָּכֵן זֶה בְּדֶרֶךְ ה' וְדָבָר זֶה אֵין לוֹ תְּשׁוּבָה לְדַעַת הַבְּרִיּוֹת
How can it be that he did not commit a crime in his hands, and yet this is in the way of the Lord? And this matter has no answer according to the knowledge of the people.

אֶלָּא לְדַעְתּוֹ שֶׁל אֵל דַּעֲוֹת יִתְבָּרֵךְ כָּךְ אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים (מְנָחוֹת כ"ט ב') בְּרַבִּי עֲקִיבָה שֶׁהֶרְאָה אוֹתוֹ
But according to the opinion of the God of all knowledge, the Sages said (Menachot 29b) that Rabbi Akiva showed him.

הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְמֹשֶׁה רַבֵּנוּ בְּמַרְאוֹת הַנְּבוּאָה וְאָמַר לְפָנָיו רִבּוֹנוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם הֶרְאִיתַנִי תּוֹרָתְךָ הַרְאֵנִי שְׂכָרוֹ רְאֵה
The Holy One, Blessed be He, to Moses our teacher in the visions of prophecy, and He said before him, "Master of the Universe, You have shown me Your Torah; show me its reward."

שְׁחוֹתְכִים בְּשָׂרוֹ בְּמַקּוֹלִין אָמַר לְפָנָיו רִבּוֹנוֹ שֶׁלְּעוֹלָם זוֹ תּוֹרָה וְזוֹ שְׂכָרָהּ אָמַר לוֹ שְׁתֹק עַל עַצְמְךָ
Those who cut his flesh with knives said before him, "Master of the Universe, this is Torah and this is its reward." He said to him, "Be silent about yourself."

כָּךְ עָלָה בְּמַחְשָׁבָה לְפָנַי רָצוּ חֲכָמִים לוֹמַר שֶׁאֵין מִיתָתוֹ שֶׁל רַבִּי עֲקִיבָא בְּיִסּוּרִין הַלָּלוּ רְאוּיָה לְנַכּוֹת לוֹ
Thus it came to my mind before the sages wanted to say that the death of Rabbi Akiva in these torments is not worthy of being deducted from him.

מִמֶּנּוּ מִעוּט מַעֲשִׂים רָעִים לְפִי שֶׁהָיָה צַדִּיק גָּמוּר כׇּל יָמָיו אֶלָּא שֶׁהָעִנְיָן נֶעֱלַם וְכָךְ עָלָה בְּמַחְשָׁבַת
From him a minority of evil deeds, because he was a perfect righteous man all his days, except that the matter was hidden and thus it arose in thought.

בַּעַל הַמַּחְשָׁבוֹת יִתְבָּרֵךְ חֶפְצוֹ וְרָצוֹנוֹ אַף עַל פִּי כֵן עִם הָעַלְמָה הַזֹּאת יֵשׁ בְּטַעֲנָה זוֹ סוֹד
The Owner of thoughts may He be blessed, His will and desire, even though so, with this maiden there is a secret in this claim.

נִמְסַר לַאֲנָשֵׁי הַתּוֹרָה וְהַקַּבָּלָה וְהוּא נִרְמָז בְּרֶמֶז חֲכָמֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה וְנִכְלָל בְּעִנְיַן סוֹד הָעִבּוּר שֶׁחֲכָמִים מוֹסְרִין
It was handed over to the people of the Torah and Kabbalah, and it is hinted at in the hint of our sages, may their memory be blessed, and it is included in the matter of the secret of the intercalation that the sages hand over.

אֹתוֹ לְתַלְמִידֵיהֶם הָרְאוּיִים וְהוּא תְּשׁוּבָתוֹ שֶׁלְאֵלִיָּהוּא עַל תּוֹכָחוֹתָיו שֶׁלְאִיּוֹב וְאַתָּה יוֹדֵעַ שֶׁהָיָה אִיּוֹב צַדִּיק בְּעֵינָיו וְהָיוּ
He showed it to his worthy disciples, and it is Elihu's response to Job's rebukes, and you know that Job was righteous in his own eyes, and they were.

יִסּוּרָיו שֶׁלֹּא עַל חֵטְא וְעֲבֵרָה לְפִי דַּעְתּוֹ עַד שֶׁהָיָה קוֹרֵא תַּגָּר עֲלֵיהֶם כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ.
His afflictions that were not due to sin and transgression according to his opinion, until he was calling out against them as we mentioned.

וְכַאֲשֶׁר אֲנַחְנוּ מִסְתַּכְּלִים בַּסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה בְּכַלְלוֹ אֲנַחְנוּ רוֹאִים שֶׁמִּתְּחִלָּה פָּתַח דְּבָרָיו (אִיּוֹב ג) לֹמַר שֶׁמֶּמְשַׁלְתָּ הַכּוֹכָבִים
And when we look at this book in general, we see that at the beginning he opened his words (Job 3) to say that the government of the stars.

וְהַמַּזָּלוֹת בִּימֵי הַלֵּדָה וְרִגְעֵי הֵרָיוֹן גּוֹרְמִים הָרָעָה לָאָדָם וְהַטּוֹב נוֹטִים דְּבָרָיו לְדֵעוֹת הוֹבְרֵי שָׁמַיִם הַמַּהֲבִילִים זֶהוּ
And the constellations in the days of birth and moments of pregnancy cause evil to man, and the good incline his words to the opinions of the sky-worshippers who confuse this.

שֶׁפָּתַח "יֹאבֵד יוֹם אוּלַד בּוֹ" שֶׁהָיָה מְקַלֵּל הַיּוֹם וְהַלַּיְלָה וְכוֹכָבֵי נִשְׁפּוּ כִּי הֵם גּוֹרְמִים רָעָתוֹ וְכֵן
He opened "May the day I was born in be lost" that he was cursing the day and night and the stars that breathed because they caused his misfortune, and so on.

עִנְיַן כׇּל הַמַּעֲנֶה וְהִנֵּה תָּפְשׂוּ אֱלִיפַז (אִיּוֹב ד ה) בִּהְיוֹתוֹ מֵסִיר דַּעְתּוֹ מִן הָאָדוֹן הָעוֹשֶׂה הַכֹּל
The matter of all the answer and behold, Eliphaz (Job 4:5) seized him when he was turning his mind away from the Lord who does everything.

בְּמִשְׁפָּט וְצֶדֶק וְנוֹתֵן הַמֶּמְשָׁלָה לַכּוֹכָבִים וְהַמַּזָּלוֹת עָנָה לוֹ "זָכֹר נָא מִי הוּא נָקִי אָבֵד" רוֹצֶה לוֹמַר
In judgment and justice, and the government gives to the stars and constellations, he answered him, "Remember, who is pure is lost," meaning...

אַחֲרֵי יִתְבָּרֵךְ שֶׁאֵין אֲנַחְנוּ רוֹאִין הַנְּקִיִּים אוֹבְדִים וְנִרְאֶה חוֹרְשֵׁי רַע שֶׁקּוֹצְרִין אוֹתוֹ זֹאת רְאָיָה כִּי מִנְּשָׁמַת
After the Blessed One, that we do not see the pure ones perishing and we see the evil ones reaping it, this is evidence that from the soul.

אֱלוֹהַּ יֹאבְדוּ הָאוֹבְדִים וְלֹא מִכּוֹחַ הַשָּׁעוֹת וְהַכּוֹכָבִים וְאָמַר אִם נִרְאֶה בְּמִקְצָת אֲנָשִׁים שֶׁאֵין הַמִּדָּה מִתְנַהֶגֶת כֵּן
God will destroy the lost, and not by the power of the hours and the stars, and he said: If we see in some people that the measure is not conducted thus.

כַּאֲשֶׁר אֶרְאֶה אוֹוִיל מַשְׁרִישׁ רָאִיתִי בְּלִבִּי קְלָלָה בָּאָה עַל נָוֵהוּ פִּתְאוֹם וְהַצַּדִּיק הַבָּאָה עָלָיו יִסּוּרִין כָּמוֹךָ
When I see a foolish man who is firmly rooted, I see in my heart a curse that suddenly comes upon his dwelling, and the righteous man who suffers such afflictions is like you.

מֹסֶר אֱלֹהִים הוּא וְאַל תְּמָאֲסֵהוּ וְאָמַר "וְהָאָדָם לַעֲמָל יוּלָּד" אֵין אֲנִי מְיַחֵס עַל דָּבָר אַחֵר רַק
The discipline of God is, and do not despise it, and he said, "Man is born for toil." I do not attribute it to anything else but...

אֶדְרֹשׁ אֶל אֵל וְאָשִׂים הַהַנְהָגָה לֶאֱלֹהִים כִּי הוּא לוֹכֵד חֲכָמִים וְיוֹדֵעַ כִּי הַצָּרוֹת שֶׁהֵם מְצַיְּרִים בָּהֶם
I will seek God and place the leadership in God's hands, because He captures the wise and knows that the troubles they are trapped in.

לְטוֹבָתָם הֵן אוֹ לְמוּסָר שֶׁיּוֹכִיחַ אֶת הָאָדָם הָאֱלֹהִים וּבַסּוֹף יַצִּילֵנוּ כִּי הוּא יַכְאִיב וְיַחְבֹּשׁ וְזֹאת תְּשׁוּבָת
For their benefit, either for the discipline that will prove the man of God, and in the end will save us because He will hurt and heal, and this is the answer.

אֱלִיפַז לְעִנְיַן מַעֲנֵה אִיּוֹב הָרִאשׁוֹן.
Eliphaz concerning the answer of the first Job.

אָז נֶהְפַּךְ אִיּוֹב אֶל תְּלוּנָה אַחֶרֶת (אִיּוֹב ו ז) וְהֶרְאָה עַצְמוֹ שֶׁהוֹדָה לִדְבָרֵי אֱלִיפַז כִּי חֲצִי
Then Job turned to another complaint (Job 6:7) and showed himself that he agreed with Eliphaz's words, because half...

שדי ובעותי אלוה עמו ושב בדרך הקללה הראשונה לומר אחרי שאין היסורין האלו במקרה מזל הם


רַק בְּרָצוֹן מְכַוֵּן וְעוֹשֶׂה מִי יִתֵּן שֶׁיִּדְכָּאֵהוּ הָאֱלֹהִים וְיָמִיתֵהוּ אוֹ יַמְתִּין עַד יִמְלָא צִבְאוֹ כִּי רוּחַ
Only with a directed will and doing, who would that God crush him and kill him, or wait until his army is full, for the spirit.

חַיָּיו כִּי מָה כֹּחוֹ לְיַחֵל עַד שֶׁיַּעֲבֹר הַמּוּסָר הַזֶּה וְתָמָה "מָה אֱנוֹשׁ כִּי יַגְדִּילֵהוּ הָאֱלֹהִים לָשִׂית"
His life, because what is his strength to hope until that discipline passes, and he wonders, "What is man that God should magnify him to set..."

אֵלָיו לִבּוֹ" וְזֶה הַמַּאֲמָר יוֹרֶה כִּי אִיּוֹב הָיָה חוֹשֵׁב מִתְּחִלָּה כִּי מִצַּד גְּרִיעוּת הָאָדָם אֵצֶל הַבּוֹרֵא
"To him his heart" and this statement shows that Job at first thought that because of man's inferiority before the Creator...

יָשִׂים אוֹתוֹ תַּחַת מֶמְשָׁלוֹת הַמִּקְרִים כְּפִי מַעֲרַךְ הַמַּזָּלוֹת וּמִשְׁטָרֵי הָאֲרָצוֹת יַאֲמִין בָּאָדָם כְּמוֹ שֶׁנַּאֲמִין אֲנַחְנוּ בַּנְּמָלִים
He will place it under the governments of chance, according to the arrangement of the constellations and the regimes of the lands, he will believe in man as we believe in ants.

או בְּשֶׁרְצֵי הָאָרֶץ וְהַבְּהֵמוֹת כִּי אֵין הַשְׁגָּחָה עֶלְיוֹנָה רַק לְקַיֵּם הַמִּין אֲבָל לַיָּחִיד מֵהֶם אֵין עִמּוֹ
Or in the creatures of the earth and the animals, because there is no higher providence except to sustain the species, but for an individual among them there is none with him.

עֹנֶשׁ וְשָׂכָר וְלֹא נֶאֱמַר בָּהֶם שֶׁחָטְאוּ כְּשֶׁיִּשְׁחֲטוּ וְלֹא זָכוּ כְּשֶׁהֶאֱרִיכוּ יָמִים וְהָיוּ מְזוֹנוֹתָם מְצוּיִים לָהֶם כָּזֹאת
Punishment and reward, and it was not said of them that they sinned when they were killed, nor did they merit when they lived long lives, and their sustenance was provided for them in such a way.

הָיְתָה סְבָרָתוֹ תְּחִלָּה כְּפִי עִנְיָן מַעֲנֵהוּ הָרִאשׁוֹן וְכֵן אָמַר לוֹ אֱלִיפַז עַצְמוֹ "וְאָמַרְתָּ מָה יָדַע אֶל"
His opinion at first was according to the matter of his first answer, and so Eliphaz himself said to him, "And you said what did El..."

הַבְּעַד עֲרָפֶל יִשְׁפֹּט עֲבִים סֵתֶר לוֹ וְלֹא יִרְאֶה" זֶה הַסָּרַת הַהַשְׁגָּחָה מִן הַנִּבְרָאִים הַשְׁפֵלִים "וְחוּג שָׁמַיִם יִתְהַלֵּךְ"
"Through the mist he will judge the clouds, a secret to him, and he will not see" This is the removal of divine providence from the lowly creatures "and the circle of heaven will walk."

הַשְּׁגָחָתוֹ לְקִיּוּם הַמִּין בִּכְלַל הַשָּׁמַיִם וְצִבְאוֹ "הָאוֹרֵחַ עוֹלָם תִּשְׁמֹר" הוּא הַגַּלְגַּל הַחוֹזֵר וְהוּא דַּרְכּוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם בַּמַּזָּלוֹת
His providence for the preservation of the species in general in the heavens and their armies, "the guest of the world you shall guard," is the revolving wheel and it is his path of the world in the constellations.

הַכּוֹכָבִים וְהוּא עַצְמוֹ אִיּוֹב מִתְנַצֵּל מִזֶּה כִּי לֹא הָיְתָה זֹאת הַסְּבָרָה הָרָעָה עִמּוֹ בְּשַׁלְוָתוֹ כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמַר
The stars and Job himself excuse this, for that bad opinion was not with him in his tranquility as he said.

אִם אֶרְאֶה אוֹר כִּי יַהֵל וְיֶרַח יָקָר הוֹלֵךְ וְיִפְתַּח בְּסֵתֶר לִבִּי כִּי מִמֶּנּוּ רַב חִילִי וְכַבִּיר
If I see light, because it shines and a precious moon walks and opens in the secret of my heart, because from it my strength is great and mighty.

מָצְאָה יָדִי כִּי זֶה עֲוֹן פְּלִילִי כִּי כָּחַשְׁתִּי לָאֵל מִמַּעַל" הַנּוֹתֵן הַכֹּל וְאֵינֶנּוּ מִכּוֹחוֹת כּוֹכָב אוֹר
My hand found that this is a criminal sin because I denied the God above who gives everything and is not from the powers of the star of light.

וְהַיָּרֵחַ רַק עַתָּה בְּבֹא אֵלָיו הַצָּרוֹת הִרְהֵר בְּלִבּוֹ זֶה מִפְּנֵי שֶׁבָּאוּ עָלָיו עַל לֹא חֲמָס בְּכַפָּיו
And the moon, only now when troubles came upon him, thought in his heart that this is because they came upon him without any wrongdoing on his part.

וְאַחֲרֵי שֶׁהִרְחִיקוּ אֱלִיפַז מִזֹּאת הַסְּבָרָה הָרָעָה אָמַר וְלָמָּה יָבוֹאוּ עָלַי יִסּוּרִין הַגְּדוֹלִים מֵאֵת הָאֱלֹהִים אֵין זֶה
And after they had distanced Eliphaz from that bad opinion, he said, "Why should I suffer great afflictions from God? This is not so."

דֶּרֶךְ מוּסָר כִּי אֵין כּוֹחַ בִּי לִסְבֹּלָם וְאֵיךְ יִגְדַּל הָאָדָם בְּעֵינָיו לִבְחֹן אוֹתוֹ לַבְּקָרִים וְאִם חָטָאתִי
A moral path, because I have no strength within me to endure them, and how can a man be great in his own eyes to test him in the mornings, and if I have sinned?

מָה יַזִּיק לְךָ שֶׁאַתָּה נוֹצַר הָאָדָם וְעַד הֵנָּה לֹא דִּבֵּר אִיּוֹב בְּצִדְקוֹ וְלֹא נִשְׁתַּבֵּחַ בְּמַעֲשָׂיו הַטּוֹבִים
What would harm you that you are the created of man, and until now Job has not spoken in his righteousness and has not praised his good deeds?

רַק בִּשְׁלוֹשׁ הַטַּעֲנוֹת הָאֵלֶּה יִתּוֹכַח יִטְעֹן אִם מוּסָר הוּא מָה כּוֹחוֹ לִסְבֹּל הַמּוּסָר הַזֶּה וְיִטְעֹן עוֹד
Only with these three arguments will he argue, will he claim, if morality is what his strength is to endure this morality and he will claim again.

כִּי הָאָדָם וְחַיָּיו הֶבֶל וְדַיּוֹ בַּמִּיתָה הַמְּעֻתֶּדֶת לוֹ כִּי כַּאֲשֶׁר יִזְכֶּה לֹא יִנָּצֵל מִמֶּנָּה כֵּן אִם
For man and his life are vanity, and it is enough for him in the death that is appointed for him, for when he will be righteous, he will not escape from it; so if.

חֲטָא לֹא הָיָה רָאוּי לְצַעַר אַחֵר כִּי מֵעִקַּר בְּרִיאָתוֹ לְהֶבֶל דָּמָה וְיִטְעֹן עוֹד אֵיכָה יִגְדַּל בְּעֵינַי.
A sin was not worthy of further grief because from the beginning of its creation it was like a vapor and it would argue further how it would grow in my eyes.

האלהים לפקוד עליו פשע וחטאת והוא ופשעו אין בעיני אלוהים וזהו עניין תלונתו במענה הזה כפי


שֶׁיִּרְאוּ הַפְּסוּקִים בְּבֵאוּר
that the verses will be explained.

אַחֲרֵי זֶה בָּא בִּלְדָּד הַשּׁוּחִי (אִיּוֹב ח) לְסַיֵּעַ עַל קְצָת דִּבְרֵי אֱלִיפַז חֲבֵרוֹ וּבֵאֵר דְּבָרָיו חֲזָקִים
After this, Bildad the Shuhite (Job 8) came to support some of Eliphaz's words, his friend, and to explain his words strongly.

מִמֶּנּוּ אָמַר כִּי הָרָעוֹת הַבָּאוֹת עַל אִיּוֹב וְעַל בָּנָיו כֻּלָּם בְּדִין וּמִשְׁפָּט עַל עֲוֹנוֹת וּפְשָׁעִים שֶׁעָשׂוּ
From him it was said that the evils that came upon Job and upon his sons, all of them, were in judgment and justice for the sins and crimes that they committed.

כִּי הָאֵל יִתְבָּרֵךְ לֹא יַעֲוֵת מִשְׁפָּט וְצֶדֶק וְעָשָׂה הַבָּנִים רְשָׁעִים גְּמוּרִים בַּחֲטָאִים שֶׁעֻנְשָׁם בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה מִפְּנֵי
Because the Almighty will not pervert justice and righteousness, and He made the sons completely wicked in sins whose punishment is in this world because of.

שֶׁנִּכְרְתוּ וּמֵתוּ וְהוּא שֶׁאָמַר "אִם בָּנֶיךָ חָטְאוּ לוֹ וְיִשְׁלְחֵם בְּיַד פִּשְׁעָם" אֲבָל אִיּוֹב נָהַג עִנְיָן אַחֵר
that they were cut off and died, and that is what he said: "If your children have sinned against Him, He will send them away in the hands of their sin," but Job acted differently.

שֶׁבָּאוּ יִסּוּרָיו לְמַרְק קְצָת חֲטָאָיו וְאִם יִשְׁחַר אֶל אֵל וְשָׁלֵם נוֹת צִדְקוֹ וְהוּא מִי שֶׁהִרְשִׁיעַ אִיּוֹב תְּחִלָּה.
that his afflictions came to purge some of his sins, and if he would turn to God and pay for his righteousness, and he is the one who initially condemned Job.

וְאָז נִתְעוֹרֵר אִיּוֹב לְצַדֵּק עַצְמוֹ (אִיּוֹב ט י) וְשָׁב אֶל טַעֲנוֹתָיו הָרִאשׁוֹנוֹת וְחִזֵּק דְּבָרָיו וּבֵאֵר אוֹתָם
And then Job awoke to justify himself (Job 9:1) and returned to his first arguments and strengthened his words and explained them.

כִּי הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ לְרֹב מַעֲלָתוֹ לֹא יַשְׁגִּיחַ בַּפְּרָטִים וַאֲפִלּוּ יַעֲנֵהוּ לֹא יַאֲמִין אִיּוֹב כִּי יַאֲזִין קוֹלוֹ
Because the Creator, may He be blessed, due to the greatness of His status, will not pay attention to details, and even if He answers him, Job will not believe it when he hears His voice.

אֲשֶׁר בְּבוֹא הַשְּׁעָרָה בְּנֹהַג שֶׁבָּעוֹלָם עַל הַכֹּל יְשׁוֹפְהוּ הָאֵל יִתְבָּרֵךְ וְיַרְבֶּה פְּצָעָיו עִם הַכְּלָל בְּחִנָּם וְלֹא
that when the gate comes in the custom of the world, on everything, God will strike him and multiply his wounds with the general public for free and not.

עַל חֲטָאוֹ וְאָמַר "תָּם אָנִי" וְלֹא חָטָאתִי מִיּוֹם שֶׁנִּבְרְאָה רַק "לֹא אֵדַע נַפְשִׁי" אִם מִצַּד בְּרִיאָתָהּ
About his sin, and he said, "I am innocent," and I have not sinned since the day I was created, only "I do not know my soul" if from the side of its creation.

יָבוֹאוּ עָלֶיהָ הַמִּקְרִים עַל כֵּן אֶמְאַס חַיַּי וְאֶרְצֶה שֶׁתָּשׁוּב נַפְשִׁי לְהֲוָיָתָהּ הָרִאשׁוֹנָה וְיִתֵּן רְאָיָה עַל הַסָּרַת
The events will come upon her; therefore, I will loathe my life and desire that my soul return to its first state, and he will give evidence of the removal.

הַהַשְׁגָּחָה כִּי הַמִּדָּה הַנּוֹהֶגֶת בְּכׇל אַחַת הִיא כִּי "תָּם וְרָשַׁע הוּא יְכַלֶּה" וְאִם תֹּאמַר שֶׁיַּעֲשֶׂה בַּהַשְׁגָּחָה
The supervision, that the measure that is practiced in each one is that "the righteous and the wicked he will destroy," and if you say that it will be done by supervision.

וִיהִי בְּחֶפֶץ וּבִרְצוֹן וְשׁוֹט הוּא שֶׁהָיָה בָּעוֹלָם לְהָמִית פִּתְאוֹם וּלְהַלְעִיג בְּהַשְׁגָּחָה עַל מַסֵּת נְקִיִּים אִם כֵּן
And it will be in desire and in will, and a whip is what was in the world to kill suddenly and to mock the providence over a mass of the innocent, if so.

אָרֶץ נָתְנָה בְּיַד רָשָׁע מִכֹּחַ מְעַוֵּל וְחוֹטֵא וְאִם אֵינוֹ כֵּן אֱמֹר מִי הוּא הַמְּכַלֶּה הַכֹּל וְהַמַּשְׁחִית
The land was given into the hand of the wicked because of the power of the evildoer and sinner. And if it is not so, say who is the one who consumes everything and destroys.

אֹתִי כִּי יָמַי קַלּוּ מִנִּי רָץ וְזֹאת טַעֲנָה אַחֶרֶת וְיִתְאַוֶּה אִיּוֹב עוֹד לִהְיוֹת בֵּינָו וּבֵין הָאֵל
Me, because my days are light from me, a runner, and this is another claim, and Job will still desire to be between us and between God.

מוכיח שיאמר [לו] שיודיעהו על מה יריבהו יעשוק אדם בלא חטא ואפילו חטא היאך ימאס יגיע


כַּפָּיו וְיִסְתַּכֵּל עַל עֲצַת רְשָׁעִים שֶׁעוֹשִׂין הַטּוֹב כִּי בַּסֵּתֶר וְאִם יֹאמַר הָאֵל כִּי לְנַסּוֹתוֹ יַעֲשֶׂה לִרְאוֹת
His hands and he will look at the advice of the wicked who do good because in secret, and if God says that to test him he will do to see.

אִם יִסְבֹּל הַמִּקְרִים אוֹ יִבְעַט וְזֶה מֵעִנְיַן הַמּוּסָר שֶׁאָמַר לוֹ אֱלִיפַז מִתְּחִלָּה עִנְיָן "הָעֵינַי בָּשָׂר לְךָ"
If he will endure the circumstances or if he will kick, and this is from the moral that Eliphaz told him from the beginning, the matter of "your eyes are flesh."

כי ביקש עוון שגלוי לפניו שלא ירשע גם יודע כי אין מידו מציל ואין צריך לנסות


כֹּחוֹ וּגְבוּרָתוֹ עִמּוֹ וְזוֹ תְּלוּנָה שְׁנִיתָה וְאָמַר אִם רָשַׁעְתִּי אַלְלַי לִי וְאִם צָדַק לֹא יִשָּׂא רֹאשׁוֹ
His strength and power are with him, and this is a second complaint, and he said: "If I have sinned, woe is me; and if I am righteous, he will not lift up his head."

יָשׁוּב אֶל טַעֲנָה שֶׁהִזְכִּיר כְּבָר כִּי כַּאֲשֶׁר לֹא יִשָּׂא רֹאשׁוֹ אִם צָדַק כִּי סוֹפוֹ לָמוּת וְלֵילֵךְ
He will return to the claim that he had already mentioned, because when he does not raise his head, if he is right, because his end is to die and go.

אֶל אָרֶץ חֹשֶׁךְ וּצְלָמוּת כֵּן אִם רָשָׁע לֹא הָיָה לוֹ לְקַבֵּל יִסּוּרִין.
To a land of darkness and gloom, so if a wicked one had not to receive chastisements.

וְעַתָּה בָּא צוֹפֶר הַנַּעֲמָתִי (אִיּוֹב י"א) מְסַיֵּעַ עוֹד אֶל דִּבְרֵי חֲבֵרָיו וְאָמַר כִּי יֵשׁ חׇכְמָה נֶעְלָמָה
And now comes Zophar the Naamathite (Job 11) supporting further the words of his friends and says that there is a hidden wisdom.

בְּמַעֲשֵׂי הָאֱלֹהִים כִּי כְּפִלִים לְתוּשִׁיָּה כִּי כׇּל הַיֵּשׁ הַהוֹוֶה בָּעוֹלָם כָּפוּל וּבוֹ חׇכְמָה נִרְאֵית וְחׇכְמָה נֶעֱלֶמֶת
In the works of God, because they are double for folly, because all that exists in the world is double and in it is revealed wisdom and hidden wisdom.

אַךְ יָדַע אִיּוֹב בֶּאֱמֶת כִּי יוֹסִיף אֵלָיו הָאֱלֹהִים מֵעֲוֹנוֹתָיו וְיִגְרַע מֵהֶן וְלֹא יוֹסִיף וְיַכְפִּיל עֲלֵיהֶם וְאִם
But Job truly knew that God would add to his sins and subtract from them, and would not add and double them, and if...

יַחְלִיף הָאֵל וְיַרְבֶּה הָאֲנָשִׁים הַנִּקְרָאִים "בְּנֵי חֲלוּף" וְיַסְגִּיר הָאָרֶץ בְּיָדָם וְיַקְהִיל אוֹתָם מִי יַשִּׁיבֶנּוּ בָּזֶה אִם
May God replace and increase the people called "Sons of Haluf" and surrender the land into their hands and gather them; who will turn us back in this if?

רְשָׁעִים הֵם כִּי הוּא יוֹדֵעַ אַנְשֵׁי הַשָּׁוְא וְרוֹאֶה הָאוֹן שֶׁלָּהֶם וְאֵינוֹ מִתְבּוֹנֵן לְמַעֲשֵׂיהֶם כִּי הוּא מוֹחֵל
They are wicked because He knows the men of vanity and sees their evil and does not consider their deeds because He forgives.

לָהֶם וּכְשֶׁהוּא מֵטִיב לָרְשָׁעִים וְיִסְבֹּל לָהֶם כׇּל שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁלֹּא יִגְמֹל רַע לַטּוֹבִים אֶלָּא אִם יָבִין אִיּוֹב
To them, and when he does good to the wicked and will endure for them, all the more so that he will not repay evil to the good, unless Job understands.

לִבּוֹ יִהְיֶה סוֹפוֹ שַׁלְוָה כִּי שַׁלְוַת הָרְשָׁעִים סוֹפָהּ תַּקָּלָה וּמִפַּח נֶפֶשׁ וְהִנֵּה תֵּרֵץ צוֹפֵר הַקּוּשְׁיוֹת הַגְּדוֹלוֹת
His heart will be at peace because the peace of the wicked ends in disaster and the disappointment of the soul, and behold, Tzofar answered the great questions.

וְהַמְּפַרְסְמוֹת שֶׁבָּזֶה הָעִנְיָן מִן הָרְשָׁעִים וְטוֹב לָהֶם כִּי הַקּוּשְׁיָה בַּצַּדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ אֵינָה נִרְאֵית בָּעוֹלָם שֶׁכֹּל
And those who publicize in this matter from the wicked, and it is good for them, because the difficulty in the righteous and it is bad for him is not seen in the world that all...

הַנִּסְפָּה נֶאֱמַר בּוֹ חַיָּב הָיָה בְּזֹאת כַּאֲשֶׁר יֹאמְרוּ בְּאִיּוֹב וְנָתַן שַׁלְוַת הָרְשָׁעִים שֶׁהָיְתָה קוּשְׁיָה טַעֲנָה וּרְאָיָה
The one who perished was said to be obligated in this, as they say about Job, and he gave the peace of the wicked, which was a difficulty, a claim, and evidence.

עַל חֲמָלַת הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ בִּבְרוּאָיו וְכִי אֵינֶנּוּ מוֹאֵס יְגִיעַ כַּפָּיו וְלֹא יִסְתַּכֵּל לְגַמְרֵי עַל עֲצַת הָרְשָׁעִים
On the compassion of the Creator, may He be blessed, in His creations, and that He does not despise the labor of His hands and does not look at all on the counsel of the wicked.

וְכׇל שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁלֹּא יִרְעַ לַטּוֹבִים רַק יָשֶׂה לָהֶם מֵעֲוֹנֹתֵיהֶם וְיִגְמֹל לָהֶם בְּפָחוֹת מֵחֲטָאֵיהֶם.
And all the more so that it will not harm the good, but rather it will spare them from their sins and reward them with less than their sins.

וְהִנֵּה דִּבְּרוּ שְׁלוֹשֶׁת הַחֲבֵרִים הָאֵלֶּה וְגִלּוּ דַּעְתָּם בְּעִנְיָן זֶה וּשְׁאַר הַטַּעֲנוֹת כֶּפֶל וְחִזּוּק לַטַּעֲנוֹת הָאֵלֶּה וְהִנֵּה
And behold, these three friends spoke and revealed their opinion in this matter, and the other arguments were repetition and reinforcement of these arguments, and behold.

הַחֲבֵרִים יַפְלִיגוּ בְּכׇל מַעֲנֵיהֶם שֶׁאַחֲרֵי זֶה בְּאַבֶּדֶן הָרְשָׁעִים וּבְהַכֵּרַת זַרְעָם מִפְּנֵי שֶׁהִיא הַקּוּשְׁיָה הַמִּתְפַּרְסֶמֶת עֲלֵיהֶם וְיַאֲרִיכוּ
The friends will elaborate on all their reasons after this in the loss of the wicked and in the recognition of their offspring, because it is the difficulty that is publicized about them, and they will elaborate.

בָּזֶה וְאִיּוֹב יַרְבֶּה לְהַצְדִּיק אֶת עַצְמוֹ וְיִטְעֹן כִּי יֵשׁ רְשָׁעִים מֵתִים בְּשַׁלְוָה וּמָה חֶפְצָם בְּבֵיתָם וּבְזַרְעָם
In this and in Job he will multiply to justify himself and argue that there are wicked people who die in peace and what is their desire in their house and in their offspring.

אַחֲרֵיהֶם וְאֵלֶּה חֲזוּקִין לַטַּעֲנוֹת הַנִּזְכָּרוֹת בַּמַּעֲנִים הָרִאשׁוֹנִים וְאֵין לָנוּ צֹרֶךְ לְפָרְטָם לְכׇל פֵּרוּשׁ הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה.
After them, and these are strengthened for the arguments mentioned in the first responses, and we have no need to detail them for any interpretation of this book.

וְהִנֵּה אֵלִיָּהוּ (אִיּוֹב ל"ב ל"ז) חָרָה אַפּוֹ עַל אִיּוֹב וְהָיָה בְּעֵינָיו טוֹעֶה גָּמוּר דְּכָתִיב "בְּאִיּוֹב אַפּוֹ"
And behold, Elihu (Job 32:37) was angry at Job and in his eyes he was a complete error, as it is written 'in Job his anger'.

עַל צִדְקֹו נַפְשׁוֹ מֵאֱלֹהִים" וְכֵן אָמַר "אִיּוֹב לֹא בְדַעַת יְדַבֵּר וּדְבָרָיו לֹא בְהַשְׂכֵּל" וְכֵן חָרָה חָרָה
"On his righteousness his soul from God" and so he said "Job does not speak with understanding and his words are not with wisdom" and so it was angry, angry.

אַפּוֹ עַל חֲבֵרָיו שֶׁהָיוּ מְצַדְּקִים מִשְׁפָּט הָאֱלֹהִים בְּרִשְׁעֹו שֶׁל-אִיּוֹב שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וּבִשְׁלוֹשֶׁת רֵעָיו חָרָה אַפּוֹ עַל אֲשֶׁר"
His anger on his friends who were justifying God's judgment in the wickedness of Job, as it is said, 'And in the three of his friends his anger was kindled upon that which'

לֹא מָצְאוּ מַעֲנֶה וְיַרְשִׁיעוּ אֶת אִיּוֹב" וְכֵן אָמַר "אֲנִי אָשִׁיבְךָ מִלִּין וְאֶת רֵעֶיךָ עִמְּךָ" כָּלְלוּ אוֹתָם
"They did not find an answer and they will condemn Job," and also said, "I will answer you with words and your friends with you," and they included them.

בְּטָעוּת וּבִשְׁגָגָה וְזֶה תִּמָּה גְּדוֹלָה בְּמָה תִּקֵּן אֵלִיָּהוּ הַשְּׁאֵילָה הַזֹּאת שֶׁהוּא צַדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ אוֹ רָשָׁע
By mistake and in error, and this is a great wonder in what way did Elihu correct this question, that he is righteous and it is bad for him, or wicked.

וטוב לו חוץ משתי דעות הללו שאין אצלנו מידה שלישית שתכריע במחלוקת הזו בשום פנים שיבואו


עַל הַחֵטְא קַל וְחָמוּר כְּלוֹמַר זְדוֹן אוֹ שִׁגָּגָה כִּדְבָרֵי חֲבֵרִי אִיּוֹב וְאִם אֵינוֹ כֵּן שֶׁלֹּא כַּדִּין
About the sin, whether light or serious, i.e., willful or accidental, as the words of my friend Job, and if it is not so, then it is not according to the law.

בְּאֵין כְּדַעַת אֶפִּיקוֹרְסִין שֶׁהָיָה אִיּוֹב נוֹטֶה אֵלָיו מִתּוֹךְ צַעֲרוֹ וּכְפִי הַטַּעֲנָה שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ בְּסִבְרָתוֹ וְאִם נֹאמַר שֶׁיֵּשׁ
In the absence of the opinion of the Epicureans, which Job was inclined to due to his grief, and according to the argument we mentioned in his reasoning, and if we say that there is...

יִסּוּרִין חוּץ מִן הַסְּבָרוֹת הָאֵלֶּה וְהֵם כְּדֵי לְהַרְבּוֹת לוֹ שָׂכָר בְּיוֹתֵר וּזְכוּת לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כִּדְבָרֵי הַמִּתְחַסְּדִים
Suffering is outside of these explanations, and they are in order to increase his reward and merit in the world to come, as the words of those who are pious.

בֶּאֱמוּנָה הַזֹּאת כְּבָר בָּאוּ בְּטַעֲנַת חֲבֵרֵי אִיּוֹב מִן הַטְּעָמִים הָהֵם שֶׁסָּבַל עֻנְשׁוֹ יוֹסִיף לוֹ זְכוּת כְּמוֹ
In this faith, they have already come with the argument of Job's friends from those reasons that suffering his punishment will add to his merit, like.

שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ "כִּי עַתָּה יָעִיר עָלֶיךָ וְשִׁלֵּם נוֹת צִדְקֶךָ" (ח ו) וּשְׁאַר הָעִנְיָן וְאִם תֹּאמַר זוֹ הָיְתָה
that we mentioned "for now he will awaken against you and repay your righteousness" (8:6) and the rest of the matter, and if you say this was...

טַעֲנָה מְשֻׁבֶּשֶׁת לְפִי שֶׁהִזְכִּיר הַגְּמוּל וְהַסּוֹף בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְיֵשׁ צַדִּיקִים שֶׁמַּגִּיעַ אֲלֵיהֶם רָעָה גְּמוּרָה מִבְּלִי תְּקוּוָה
A distorted claim because he mentioned the reward and the end in this world, and there are righteous people to whom complete evil befalls without hope.

וְאַחֲרִית בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְיֵלְכוּ בְּלֹא חֶמְדָּה אֲבָל הָיָה לָהֶם לְהַזְכִּיר גְּמוּל הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הִנֵּה לֹא רָאִינוּ
And the end in this world, and they will go without desire, but it was for them to mention the reward of the next world; behold, we have not seen.

אֱלִיהוּא שֶׁהִזְכִּיר בְּעוֹלָם הַבָּא דָּבָר אֵצֶל אִיּוֹב וַחֲבֵרָיו רָמְזוּ בּוֹ יוֹתֵר מִמֶּנּוּ כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמַר אִיּוֹב "אַךְ"
Elihu, who mentioned in the world to come a matter concerning Job and his friends, hinted at it more than he did, as Job said, "But".

שְׁתַּיִם אַל תַּעֲשֶׂה עִמָּדִי אָז מִפָּנֶיךָ לֹא אֶסְתַּר" הִזְכִּיר הַמִּיתָה בְּאָמְרוֹ "כִּי עַתָּה אֶחְרִישׁ וְאֶגּוֹעַ" (יג יט)
Two things do not do to me, then from before you I will not hide. He mentioned death in saying, "For now I will be silent and I will die" (13:19).

וְאָמַר שֶׁלֹּא יַעֲשֶׂה עִמּוֹ שְׁתַּיִם שֶׁיְּהֵא נִדּוֹן בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְיִסְתַּר מִמֶּנּוּ אָז בַּמִּיתָה וְהוּא הַקַּבָּלַת פָּנָי
And he said that he would not do two things with him: that he would be judged in this world and that he would be hidden from him at death, and that is the acceptance of my face.

הַשְּׁכִינָה בְּגַן עֵדֶן הַנְּפָשׁוֹת וְכֵן "אֵשׁ לֹא נָפַח" (י כו) "וְאֶרֶץ עִיפְּתָה כְּמוֹ אוֹפֶל" (י כב)
The Shekhinah in the Garden of Eden of the souls, and likewise "He did not blow fire" (Y 26) "And the land was dark like an eclipse" (Y 22).

וְכִיּוֹצֵא בָזֶה כֻּלָּם הֵם רְמָזִים לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְדִינִים לְדַעַת רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה בְּכׇל הַהַגָּדוֹת וְכָךְ הִזְכִּיר בָּהֶם
And like this all of them are hints to Gehenna and judgments according to the knowledge of our sages, may their memory be blessed, in all the Haggadot, and thus he mentioned them.

הַתַּרְגּוּם וְעוֹד כִּי זֶה אֵינֶנּוּ מִתְּשׁוּבַת הַקּוּשְׁיָה הַהִיא שֶׁהָיָה אִיּוֹב אוֹמֵר כִּי הוּא הָיָה צַדִּיק גָּמוּר
The translation and also because this is not from the answer to that question which Job was saying because he was a perfect righteous one.

בְּלֹא מִכְשׁוֹל וְעָוֹן וְלָמָּה יָמוּת בְּנֶפֶשׁ מָרָה וְלֹא יֹאכַל בְּטוּב בָּזֶה וּבַבָּא וְיִזְכֶּה לִשְׁתֵּי הַשֻּׁלְחָנוֹת בְּעֵינָיו
Without stumbling and sin, and why should he die with a bitter soul, and not eat of the good in this and in the coming, and merit the two tables in his eyes.

וְכִבְר זָכוּ לָהֶם רַבִּים בְּמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל הַחֲסִידִים וְכֵן הַדִּין נוֹתֵן כִּי מַדּוּעַ יָרַע אֱלֹהִים לְאוֹהֲבָיו עַל
And many have already been privileged with them in the pious kings of Israel, and so the law gives, for why would God do evil to his lovers?

לֹא חָמָס בְּכַפֵּיהֶם "חֲלִילָה לָאֵל מֵרֶשַׁע וְשַׁדַּי מֵעָוֶל"
No theft in their hands, "far be it from God to do wrong and from the Almighty to do injustice."

(לד י) וְהִנֵּה אֵלִיָּהוּ יֹאמַר "כִּי פֹּעַל אָדָם יְשַׁלֵּם לוֹ וּכְאוֹרֵחַ אִישׁ יַמְצִיאֶנּוּ" וְעַתָּה יַחְזֹר הַמַּחְלוֹקֶת
(34:10) And behold, Elijah will say, "Because a man's work will be paid to him, and as a guest of a man he will find it," and now the dispute will return.

בֵּינֵיהֶם לְדִבְרֵי אִיּוֹב שֶׁהָיָה צַדִּיק גָּמוּר בְּעֵינָיו וְתִרְאֶה אִיּוֹב מִיָּד שֶׁשָּׁמַע דִּבְרֵי אֵלִיָּהוּ בַּתְּשׁוּבָה הַהִיא שֶׁעִנְיָנָה
Among them, in the words of Job, who was a perfect righteous man in his own eyes, and you will see Job immediately upon hearing the words of Elihu in that response whose subject matter was...

מוֹרֶה שֶׁהִיא עִנְיָן חָדָשׁ וְאֵינוֹ דּוֹמֶה לְמַעֲנֵה חֲבֵרָיו וּכְמוֹ שֶׁאָמַר "וְלֹא עָרַךְ אֵלָיו מִלִּין וּבְאֹמְרֵיכֶם לֹא אָשִׁיבֶנּוּ"
A teacher that is a new matter and is not similar to the answer of his friends, and as he said, "He did not arrange words for him, and in your saying I will not answer him."

(לֵב יָד) לֹא פָּתַח פִּיו לַעֲנוֹת וְהִנֵּה זֶה יוֹרֶה שֶׁקִּבֵּל דְּבָרָיו וְהָיוּ הַטַּעֲנוֹת הָהֵם מַסְפִּיקוֹת לִשְׁאֵלוֹתָיו
He did not open his mouth to answer, and behold, this indicates that he accepted his words, and those arguments were sufficient for his questions.

עַד שֶׁקִּבֵּל עָלָיו מֵהֶן הַשְּׁתִיקָה וְכֵן אָמַר לוֹ "אִם יֵשׁ מְלִין הַשִּׁיבֵנִי וְגוֹ'" וּכְבָר בָּאוּ דְּבָרַי
Until he accepted from them silence, and likewise he said to him, "If there are words, answer me and so on," and my words have already come.

אֵלִיָּהוּ סְתוּמִים מִדִּבְרֵי חֲבֵרָיו כֻּלָּם וְעִנְיַן פֵּרוּשָׁם סָתוּם מְאֹד וּמִי שֶׁלֹּא יִפְתַּח אֶת דַּעְתּוֹ וְיַשִּׂיא אֶת
Elihu's words are sealed from the words of all his friends, and the meaning of their interpretation is very sealed, and whoever does not open his mind and bring forth...

סִבְרָתוֹ לֹא יִמְצָא בָּהֶם וְלֹא בְּכׇל מָה שֶׁנִּתְפָּרֵשׁ מֵהֶם בְּיַד מְפָרְשֵׁי הַקְּרִיָּה [בְּדָפוּס הַמִּקְרָא] דָּבָר רָאוּי
His reasoning will not be found in them nor in all that has been explained about them by the commentators of the reading [in the printed Bible] a suitable matter.

אוֹ טַעֲנָה הֲגוּנָה מְחֻדֶּשֶׁת מִדִּבְרֵי הַחֲבֵרִים הַהֵם אֲבָל הוּא מִסּוֹדוֹת הַתּוֹרָה שֶׁנֶּעֶלְמוּ לְבַד מִן הַזּוֹכִים לָהֶם
Or a respectable claim renewed from the words of those friends, but it is from the secrets of the Torah that are hidden except for those who merit them.

לְקַבָּלָה וְהַפֵּרוּשׁ בָּהֶן אָסוּר בִּכְתָב וְהָרֶמֶז אוֹבֵד תּוֹעֶלֶת.
Its acceptance and the interpretation in it are forbidden in writing, and the hint is lost benefit.

וְהִנֵּה נִתְחַיְּבוּ חֲבֵרָיו שֶׁלְּאִיּוֹב אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁהֵם מְצַדְּקִים מַעֲשֵׂה הָאֱלֹהִים בְּהִיוֹתָם מְזַכִּים אוֹתָם בְּזֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ
And behold, Job's friends were obligated, even though they justified God's actions by vindicating them in this manner.

שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וַיֹּאמֶר ה' אֶל אֱלִיפַז הַתִּימָנִי חָרָה אַפִּי בְּךָ וּבִשְׁנֵי רֵעֶיךָ כִּי לֹא דִּבַּרְתֶּם אֵלַי נְכוֹנָה"
as it is said, "The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, 'My wrath is upon you and upon your two friends, because you have not spoken to Me correctly.'"

כְּעַבְדֵי אִיּוֹב (מ"ב ז) וְלֹא הָיָה אֵלִיָּהוּ בִּכְלַל הָעֹנֶשׁ הַזֶּה וְהִנֵּה לְפִי הַנִּרְאֶה לֹא הָיָה עֹנֶשׁ
As the servants of Job (Job 42:7) and Elihu was not included in this punishment, and behold, according to the apparent, there was no punishment.

וְחָטָא עַל חֲבֵרָיו וַאֲפִלּוּ אִם לֹא יָרְדוּ לְעֹמֶק הַדִּין אֲבָל טַעַם הַחֵטְא [כְּטַעַם] עוֹנְשֵׁי הַשְּׁגָגוֹת שֶׁמִּתְכַּפְּרִין
And he sins against his companions, even if they do not delve into the depth of the judgment, but the reason for the sin [is like] the punishments of the unintentional sins that are atoned for.

בְּקָרְבָּן וְלָכֵן צֻוָּה לְקָרֵב עֲלֵיהֶם עוֹלוֹת כִּי מִפְּנֵי שֶׁהָיוּ שְׁלוֹשֶׁת הַחֲבֵרִים טוֹעִים בְּלִי סָפֵק אֶצְלָם שֶׁאֵין
In the sacrifice and therefore he was commanded to sacrifice burnt offerings upon them because the three friends were certainly mistaken about them that there is no...

יְסוּרִין בְּלֹא עָוֹן בְּשׁוּם פָּנִים וְשֶׁאִיּוֹב הָיָה רָשָׁע הָיוּ נוֹתְנִין דֶּרֶךְ לְאִיּוֹב שֶׁהוּא יוֹדֵעַ צֶדֶק עַצְמוֹ
Afflictions without sin in any way, and that Job was wicked, would give a way for Job to know his own righteousness.

שֶׁיִּהְיוּ מַעֲשֵׂי הָאֱלֹהִים בְּעֵינָיו בְּלֹא מִשְׁפָּט וְהָיָה לָהֶם לוֹמַר כִּי מַעֲשֵׂה הָאֱלֹהִים נֶעְלַם מִדַּעְתָּם אַחֲרֵי שֶׁלֹּא
that the works of God would be in his eyes without judgment and they would have to say that the work of God was hidden from their understanding after they had not.

הַשִּׂיגוּ לְעִנְיַן הַקַּבָּלָה מִפִּי הַנְּבִיאִים כְּמוֹ שֶׁזָּכָה אֵלִיהוּא אוֹ יִהְיֶה הַחֵטְא הַזֶּה מִפְּנֵי שֶׁשָּׁבְתוּ מֵעֲנוֹת אֶת
"They achieved the matter of reception from the mouths of the prophets like Elihu was entitled to, or this sin will be because they stopped answering."

אִיּוֹב וְהֶאֱמִינוּ וְקִבְּלוּ סְבָרָתוֹ הָרִאשׁוֹנָה הָרָעָה וְהָאֵל יוֹדֵעַ מִצְּפוּן לִבָּם וְנֶעֶנְשׁוּ עָלָיו כִּי אִיּוֹב חָזַר בּוֹ
Job, and they believed and accepted his first bad opinion, and God knows the innermost of their hearts, and they were punished for it because Job repented.

וְעָשָׂה תְּשׁוּבָה וְהֵם לֹא נִזְדַּרְזוּ לְהִתְוַדּוֹת עַל חֲטָאָם כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמַר הוּא "לִשְׁמֹעַ אֹזֶן שָׁמַעְתִּיךָ" וְהָיִיתִי טוֹעֶה
And he repented, and they did not hurry to confess their sin, as he said, "To hear an ear you heard me," and I was mistaken.

בְּיַדְעָתְךָ וְעַתָּה כֵּיוָן שֶׁרָאֲתָה עֵינִי כְּבוֹדְךָ וְהִשִּׂיגְתִּי מִמְּךָ הַשָּׂגָה אֲמִתִּית אָמַסְתִּי וְנִחַמְתִּי עַל עָפָר וְאֵפֶר (מִבְּ)
In your knowledge and now, since my eye saw your glory and I obtained from you a true apprehension, I was humbled and I repented upon dust and ashes (from B).

ה ו) וְהֵם שֶׁלֹּא אָמְרוּ כֵּן הֻצְרְכוּ לְכַפָּרָה וְזֶה עִנְיַן הַכָּתוּב אוֹמֵר "לְבִלְתִּי עֲשׂוֹת עִמָּכֶם נְבֵלָה"
And they, who did not say so, needed atonement, and this is the meaning of the scripture that says, "lest you do abomination with you."

מִפְּנֵי שֶׁהֵם מְזַכִּים מַעֲשֵׂה הָאֱלֹהִים וְאִם יָבוֹא עֲלֵיהֶם מִמֶּנּוּ קֶצֶף יֵרָאֶה כְּדָבָר שֶׁאֵינוֹ הָגוּן.
Because they justify God's work, and if anger comes upon them from Him, it will appear as something improper.

וְכֵן מַרְאֶה עִנְיַן רֹב מוּסָרֵי הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא אֶל אִיּוֹב לַעֲלוֹת מַעֲשָׂיו הַנִּפְלָאִים וּלְהוֹדִיעוֹ מִעוּט דַּעְתּוֹ
And likewise, the matter of the majority of the moral teachings of the Holy One, blessed be He, is shown to Job to elevate his wondrous deeds and to inform him of the smallness of his understanding.

שֶׁלְּאִיּוֹב בְּיְסוֹד הַנִּבְרָאִים שֶׁלֹּא יָדַע יְסוֹדוֹת הָאָרֶץ וְהַשָּׁמַיִם וְהַבְּהֵמוֹת וְהַיָּם וּבְרִיּוֹתָיו וְהַכְּלָל מַעֲשֵׂה בְּרֵאשִׁית וְרָצוֹנוֹ לוֹמַר
That Job in the foundation of the created beings, who did not know the foundations of the earth and the heavens and the animals and the sea and his creations, and the general work of creation, and his desire to say...

כִּי מִי שֶׁלֹּא יָדַע בְּכׇל אֵלֶּה עִם רְאוֹתוֹ בָּהֶם הַהַשְׂגָּחָה וְטוֹב הַסֵּדֶר וְהַהַנְהָגָה אַף עַל פִּי
Because whoever does not know all these things, with his seeing in them the providence and the good order and the governance, even though...

שֶׁהֵם בְּלֹא זְכוּת וּבְלֹא חוֹבָה לָמָּה [לֹא] יַחְשֹׁב בִּכְלָל שֶׁמִּשְׁפָּטֵי הָאֱלֹהִים בִּבְנֵי אָדָם נֶעֱלָמִים וְסוֹדָם בִּיצִירַת
that they are without merit and without obligation, why [not] would he consider in general that the judgments of God in the sons of man are hidden and their secret in creation.

הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְהַגּוּף סָתוּם וְחָתוּם וְלָמָּה לֹא יִתֵּן צֶדֶק לְפָעֳלוֹ מִן הַסְּתָם אַחֲרֵי רְאוֹתוֹ חַמְלָתוֹ וְהַשְׁגָּחָתוֹ הַטּוֹבָה
The soul and the body are sealed and closed, and why does he not give justice to his work from the outset after seeing his mercy and his good watchfulness?

בְּשְׁאָר הַבְּרִיּוֹת הַשְּׁפָלוֹת וּמַדּוּעַ יָבוֹא אַחֲרֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת אֲשֶׁר כְּבָר עָשׂוּהוּ וְנִכְלַל עִם זֶה לְאִיּוֹב הוֹדָעָה
In the rest of the lowly creatures, and why would he come after the king, what they have already done, and included with this to Job a message.

אַחֶרֶת כְּנֶגֶד הָאֶפִּיקוֹרוֹס שֶׁבָּא לְדִבְרָיו לוֹמַר שֶׁמֵּחֲמַת פְּחִיתוּת הָאָדָם אֵצֶל בּוֹרְאוֹ אֵינוֹ מַשְׁגִּיחַ עָלָיו לְטוֹב אוֹ
Another against the Epicurean who came to his words to say that because of the lowliness of man before his Creator, He does not watch over him for good or.

לְרַע כִּי עַתָּה יְפָרֵשׁ לוֹ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא טוֹב הַשְׁגָּחָתוֹ בְּכׇל אַחַת מִן הַבְּרִיּוֹת מִבְּנֵי אָדָם
For the bad, because now the Holy One, blessed be He, will explain to him the goodness of His providence in each of the creations from among the human beings.

עַד קְטַנֵּי בְּרִיּוֹת אֶרֶץ וְהַיָּם וְהַנְהָגָתוֹ בְּכֻלָּם בְּהַשְׁוָיָה וּבְטוֹב הַצָּרִיךְ לַהַנְהָגָה וְזֶה עִנְיַן מַעֲנֵה הָאֱלֹהִים יִתְבָּרֵךְ
Until the smallest of the earth and sea creatures, and His guidance over all of them in equality and in the good that is necessary for guidance; and this is the matter of the answer of God, may He be blessed.

שְׁמוֹ עִם מָה שֶׁנִּרְמָז בִּדְבָרֵי הַמַּעֲנֶה הַטַּעַם שֶׁחִדֵּשׁ אֵלִיָּהוּא בַּצַּדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ בְּקֶצֶת הַפְּסוּקִים יוֹדְעֵי קַבָּלָה
His name with what is hinted in the words of the answer the taste that Elihu renewed in the righteous and it is bad for him in some of the verses those who know Kabbalah.

וְעַל זֶה נִתְחָרֵט אִיּוֹב וְשָׁב בְּתְשׁוּבָה לְבוֹרְאוֹ כִּי כְּבָר יָדַע מִדִּבְרֵי אֵלִיָּהוּ כִּי הַטַּעֲנָה הַהִיא שֶׁאָמַר
And for this Job repented and returned in repentance to his Creator, because he already knew from the words of Elihu that the claim which he had said.

לוֹ הִיא טַעֲנָה הֲגוּנָה וּמְקֻבֶּלֶת וְהִיא סוֹף הַשָּׂגַת הָאָדָם בַּיְדִיעָה הַזֹּאת וְאֵין אַחֲרֶיהָ קוּשְׁיָה בְּדַעְתּוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם
If it is a respectable and accepted argument, and it is the end of man's attainment in this knowledge, and there is no objection to it in his mind, for man.

וְנִתְבָּרֵר לוֹ בְּיִדִּיעָה שְׁלֵמָה מֵעִנְיַן נְבוּאָתוֹ בְּמַעֲנֵה הָאֱלֹהִים יִתְבָּרֵךְ כִּי כׇּל מַעֲשָׂיו בְּסֵדֶר וּבְהַשְׁגָּחָה וְשֶׁיֵּשׁ עוֹד
And it was clarified to him with complete knowledge about the matter of his prophecy in the answer of God, exalted be He, that all his actions are in order and in providence, and that there is still more.

בָּהֶם טְעָמִים סְתוּמִים וַחֲתוּמִים אֵין מַחְשָׁבָה מַשִּׂיגָה אוֹתָם זוּלָתִי הַמַּחְשָׁבָה שֶׁקָּדְמָה לִבְרִיאָתוֹ שֶׁלְּעוֹלָם יִתְבָּרֵךְ שְׁמוֹ וְחֶפְצוֹ
In them are hidden and sealed tastes; no thought can grasp them, except the thought that preceded the creation of the world, may His name and will be blessed.

וַיִּתְעַלֶּה לָנֶצַח.
And He was exalted forever.

וְסוֹף דָּבָר רָאוּי לְהַאֲמִין בָּזֶה לְכׇל בַּעַל מִקְרֶה וּפֶגַע כִּי מִקְרֵהוּ וְצָרָתוֹ עַל עֲוֹנוֹ וּפִשְׁעוֹ וְיָשׁוּב
And the end of the matter is that it is appropriate to believe in this for every person who experiences misfortune and trouble, because his misfortune and trouble are due to his sin and transgression, and he will repent.

עַל הַנּוֹדָע מֵהֶם בְּתְשׁוּבָה וְעַל לֹא הוֹדָע שֶׁלּוֹ שֶׁאֵינוֹ זָכוּר בָּהֶם יְתוֹדֶה מִן הַנִּשְׁאָר בַּסֵּתֶר וְאִם
He will confess about what is known from them in repentance and about what is not known of him that is not remembered in them, from what remains hidden, and if...

יִהְיֶה צַדִּיק אֹבֵד בְּצִדְקָתוֹ יִהְיֶה מְיַחֵס זֶה תְּחִלָּה אֶל מִעוּט עֲבֵרוֹת שֶׁעָשָׂה וְכֵן יַחְשֹׁב הָרָשָׁע הַשָּׁלֵיו
A righteous person will be lost in his righteousness; he will attribute this initially to the few sins he has committed, and likewise the wicked will think.

יִהְיֶה תּוֹלֶה שַׁלְוָתוֹ בְּמִעוּט הַצְּדָקָה וּמַעֲשֵׂה הַטּוֹב שֶׁעָשָׂה וְאַחֲרֵי כֵן אִם יַעֲבֹר דַּעְתּוֹ לְמִי שֶׁיִּרְאֶנּוּ אוֹבֵד
He will be one who relies on the smallness of the charity and the good deed that he did, and afterwards, if his mind passes to someone who sees him lost.

וְהוּא צַדִּיק גָּמוּר רַב הַזְּכִיּוֹת נָקִי הַחֵטְא וּבַר הַלֵּבָב וְזוֹ אֵינָהּ קוּשְׁיָה בְּדַעְתּוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם רַק לְמִי
And he is a perfect righteous one, abundant in merits, pure of sin and of a good heart, and this is not a difficulty in his mind for man, but for whom?

שֶׁיּוֹדֵעַ עַצְמוֹ שֶׁהוּא צַדִּיק וְאֵין פֶּשַׁע לוֹ וְעָוֹן מַסְפִּיק לָרָעָה הַמּוֹצְאָה אוֹתוֹ וְאֶפְשָׁר שֶׁיִּשָּׂא פָּנִים לְעַצְמוֹ
Who knows himself that he is righteous and there is no sin for him, and sin is enough for the evil that finds him, and it is possible that he will bear a face to himself.

וְיַשִּׂיא נַפְשׁוֹ בְּצִדְקוֹ אֲבָל זֶה הַסָּפֵק אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁהוּא מוּעָט עִם הַסָּפֵק הָאַחֵר שֶׁהוּא רַב
And he will trust his soul in his righteousness, but this doubt, even though it is small, with the other doubt which is great.

ממנו שיראה הרשע הגמור המוחלט מצליח בכל עניין ההצלחות יהיה חושב מיחס תלאות הצדיק בעיניו או


שַׁלְוַת הָרָשָׁע הַזֶּה בְּסוֹד הַנִּזְכָּר הַנִּכְלָל בְּשֵׁם סוֹד הָעִבּוּר אִם זִכָּהוּ הָאֱלֹהִים אֵלָיו לְדַעְתּוֹ מִפִּי הַקַּבָּלָה
The tranquility of this wicked one in the secret that is mentioned, included in the name of the secret of the conception, if God granted him to it according to his understanding from the mouth of tradition.

הַנֶּאֱמָנָה לְאַחַר שֶׁיִּשְׁמֹר בּוֹ מְאוֹד מִן הַמִּכְשׁוֹל וְהַטָּעוּת כִּי לֹא רַבִּים יַחְכְּמוּ וְאִם לֹא שָׁמַע אוֹתוֹ
The trustworthy one after he will guard it very much from the obstacle and the error because not many will be wise, and if he did not hear him.

יְהֵא תּוֹלֶה הָעִנְיָן בּוֹ עַל דַּעַת יוֹדְעוֹ וְעִם כׇּל זֶה יַחְשֹׁב בֵּין הַיּוֹדֵעַ בֵּין שֶׁאֵינוֹ יוֹדֵעַ
May he be one who hangs the matter on him, on the knowledge of him, and with all this he will think between the one who knows and the one who does not know.

שֶׁיֵּשׁ אַחֲרֵי כׇּל זֶה צֶדֶק גָּמוּר וְטוֹב טַעַם וְדַעַת בְּמִשְׁפָּטֵי הָאֱלֹהִים מִן הַצַּד הַנֶּעְלָם וְהַכֹּל בְּצֶדֶק
That after all this there is complete justice and good taste and understanding in the judgments of God from the hidden side, and everything in justice.

בַּמִּשְׁפָּט בְּחֶסֶד וּבְרַחֲמִים.
In judgment with kindness and mercy.

וְאִם תִּשְׁאַל כֵּיוָן שֶׁיֵּשׁ עִנְיָן נֶעֱלָם בַּמִּשְׁפָּט וְנִצְטָרֵךְ לְהַאֲמִין בְּצִדְקוֹ מִצַּד שׁוֹפֵט הָאֱמֶת יִתְבָּרֵךְ לָמָּה תְּטַרְחִיחַ
And if you ask, since there is a hidden matter in the judgment and we must believe in its righteousness from the side of the true Judge, may He be blessed, why would you trouble?

אוֹתָנוּ לִלְמֹד הַטַּעֲנוֹת שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ וְהַסּוֹד שֶׁרָמַזְנוּ וְלֹא נַשְׁלִיךְ הַכֹּל עַל הַסָּמֶךְ שֶׁנַּעֲשָׂה בַּסּוֹף שֶׁאֵין לְפָנָיו לֹא
To teach us the arguments that we have interpreted and the secret that we have hinted at, and not to throw everything on the support that was made at the end, which has nothing before it.

עוֹלֶה וְלֹא שָׁכְחָה אֶלָּא כֹּל דְּבָרָיו מִשְׁפָּט זֶה טַעֲנַת הַכְּסִילִים מְאוּסֵי הַחׇכְמָה כִּי יוֹעִיל לְעַצְמֵנוּ בְּלִמּוּד
It ascends and does not forget, but all his words are this judgment: the argument of the fools, the abhorrence of wisdom, because it will benefit us in learning.

שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ לִהְיוֹתֵנוּ חֲכָמִים הָאֱלֹהִים יִתְבָּרֵךְ וּמִדֶּרֶךְ מַעֲשָׂיו וְעוֹד נִהְיֶה מַאֲמִינִים וּבוֹטְחִים בֶּאֱמוּנָתוֹ בַּנּוֹדָע וּבַנֶּעֱלָם יוֹתֵר וְיוֹדְעֵי [מִזּוּלָתֵנוּ]
That we have mentioned being wise, the God who will be blessed, and from the way of His actions, and we will still be believers and trusting in His faith in the known and the hidden more, and knowing [from others].

כִּי נִלְמֹד סָתוּם מִן הַמְּפֹרָשׁ לָדַעַת יֹשֶׁר הַדִּין וְצֶדֶק הַמִּשְׁפָּט וְכֵן חוֹבַת כׇּל הַנִּבְרָא עוֹבֵד מֵאַהֲבָה
Because we learn the hidden from the explicit, to know the justice of the judgment and the righteousness of the law, and likewise the duty of every created being to work from love.

וּמִיִּרְאָה לָתוּר בְּדַעְתּוֹ לְצַדֵּק הַמִּשְׁפָּט וּלְאַמֵּת הַדִּין כְּפִי מָה שֶׁיָּדוֹ מַשִּׂיגַת וְהֵם הַדְּרָכִים שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ מִדַּרְכֵי חֲכָמִים
And from fear to search in his mind to justify the judgment and to confirm the law according to what his hand reaches, and these are the ways that we have explained from the ways of the sages.

זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה כְּדֵי שֶׁתִּתְיַשֵּׁב דַּעְתּוֹ עָלָיו בָּעִנְיָן וְיִתְאַמֵּת אֵלָיו דִּין בּוֹרְאוֹ כְּמַצְדִּיק מָה שֶׁיַּשִּׂיג וְיַכִּיר הַדִּין
Their memory be blessed so that his mind will settle on it in the matter, and the judgment of his Creator will be confirmed to him, as one who justifies what he attains and recognizes the judgment.

בְּמָה שֶׁהוּא נֶעֱלָם מִמֶּנּוּ וְכׇל שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁטַּעֲנַת הַסּוֹד הַנִּזְכָּר לֹא תַּשְׁאִיר בְּדַעַת הָאָדָם קוּשְׁיָה וְלֹא תִּמְצָא
In what is hidden from him, and all the more so that the claim of the secret mentioned will not leave a question in the mind of man and will not be found.

עִמּוֹ טַעֲנָה מְסֻפֶּקֶת בְּשׁוּם פָּנִים וְאִם יִרְצֶה לָשִׂים סוֹף מַחְשַׁבְתּוֹ בְּכָאן הוּא רַשַּׁאי מִפְּנֵי שֶׁאֵין הַטַּעֲנוֹת
With him a doubtful claim in any way, and if he wants to put an end to his thought here, he is permitted because there are no claims.

מַסְפִּיקוֹת לְכׇל הַנְהָגַת הַבְּרוּאִים וְעַל עִנְיָן זֶה הִזְכִּיר וְאָמַר אֵלִיהוּא "אֶשָּׂא דַּעִי לְמֶרְחָק וּלְפׇעֳלִי אֶתֵּן צֶדֶק"
Sufficient for the governance of all the creatures, and on this matter Elihu mentioned and said, "I will bear my mind to a distance, and to my work I will give justice."

(אִיּוֹב ל"ו ג) לֹמַר שֶׁיִּשָּׂא דַּעְתּוֹ עַד סוֹף הַשָּׂגַת הַדַּעַת לָשֵׂאת טַעַם וְטַעֲנָה עַל מִשְׁפָּטַי הָאֱלֹהִים.
To say that he will bear his mind until the end of the attainment of knowledge to bear reason and argument upon the judgments of God.

וְאַחֲרֵי כֹּל זֹאת רוֹצֶה יִתֵּן צֶדֶק לְפֹעֲלוֹ כִּי רַק הַטַּעַם הַמּוּשָׂג בְּדַעְתּוֹ יוֹכִיחַ עַל הָרָחוֹק וְהַנֶּעֱלָם
And after all this, he wants to give justice to his work, because only the taste that is grasped in his mind will prove the distant and hidden.

שֶׁצֶּדֶק עִמּוֹ וְהַיֹּשֶׁר בְּמַפְעָלָיו וַאֲנִי מַזְהִיר עוֹד לְמִי שֶׁיִּרְצֶה לִהְיוֹת מִמִּי שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בּוֹ "וְצַדִּיק בֶּאֱמוּנָתוֹ יִחְיֶה".
that justice is with him and integrity in his works, and I warn further anyone who wants to be among those about whom it is said, 'And the righteous shall live by his faith.'

וְאֵינוֹ חָפֵץ לְהִמָּנוֹת עִם הַנֶּאֱמָר בָּהֶם "בָּנִים לֹא אֵמוּן בָּם" שֶׁלֹּא יִשְׁתַּדֵּל בַּחֲקִירָה הַזֹּאת מִפִּי הַסְּפָרִים
And he does not desire to be counted among those about whom it is said, "Sons I do not trust in them," so that he will not exert himself in this inquiry from the books.

וְרֹב הַמְּדַבְּרִים בָּעִנְיָן הַזֶּה וְיָבִין וְיֵדַע כִּי אֵין הַסָּפֵק הַזֶּה רַב מְאוֹד בְּעִנְיָנֵי בְּנֵי הָאָדָם וְאֵינוֹ
And most of those who speak about this matter, and understand and know that this doubt is not very great in the affairs of human beings, and it is not ...

צָרִיךְ בְּרֹב הָעִנְיָנִים הַמִּתְקַשִּׁים בִּתְחִלַּת הָעִיּוּן.
It is necessary in most of the matters that are difficult at the beginning of contemplation.

וכבר בטל הרבה מן המחקר הזה הרב הגדול זכר צדיק לברכה בטענותיו בפרק שנים עשר מספר


מוֹרֶה הַנְּבוּכִים (ח"ג) אָמַר זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה כִּי יַעֲלֶה עַל לֵב בְּנֵי הֶהָמוֹן כִּי רָעוֹת הָעוֹלָם יוֹתֵר
The Guide of the Perplexed (III) said, may his memory be blessed, that it will come to the mind of the common people that the evils of the world are greater.

מִן הַטּוֹבוֹת וְכֶשֶׁתַּעֲרִיךְ מְנוּחַת הָאָדָם וְתַעֲנוּגָיו בִּזְמַן מְנוּחָתוֹ אֶל הַדְּאָגוֹת וְהַמַּכְאוֹבִים הַקָּשִׁים [וְהַפְּגָעִים וְהַחֲלָיִם וְהַמִּכְשׁוֹלוֹת יִרְאֶה]
From the good things, and when you compare the rest of a person and his pleasures at the time of his rest to the worries and the severe pains [and the injuries and the illnesses and the obstacles, he will see].

לָהֶם כִּי מְצִיאוּת הָאָדָם לְרַעְתּוֹ וְהוּא זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה בֵּאֵר כִּי רֹב הָרָעוֹת] הַבָּאוֹת בְּאִישֵׁי בְּנֵי אָדָם
For them, because the existence of man is for his evil, and he, may his memory be blessed, explained that most of the evils that come upon the individuals of mankind.

באות מחסרון דעתם ומסכלותנו נזעק ונשוע ומן הרעות אשר נסבב לנפשותינו ברצוננו נדאג ונכאב כמו שאמר


שְׁלֹמֹה (מִשְׁלֵי י"ט) "אוֹלַת אָדָם תְּסַלֵּף דַּרְכּוֹ וְעַל ה' יִזְעַף לִבּוֹ" וְהֶאֱרִיךְ בָּזֶה וּפֵרֵשׁ כִּי רֹב
Solomon (Proverbs 19) "The folly of man will pervert his way, and his heart will be angry with the Lord" and he expanded on this and explained that most.

הָרָעוֹת הַהֲוָת בִּבְנֵי אָדָם הֵן מִנִּזְקֵי אָדָם בְּאָדָם כְּגוֹן הַקְּטָטוֹת וְהַמִּלְחָמוֹת אוֹ מִנִּזְקֵי אָדָם לְנַפְשׁוֹ כָּרוֹב
The evils that occur among people are from the harm that people cause each other, such as quarrels and wars, or from the harm that people cause to their own souls, as is often the case.

הַתַּאֲוָה לְמַאֲכָל וּלְתַשְׁמִישׁ וְכַיּוֹצֵא בָּזֶה וְאֵין רָאוּי לְנִכְנָס בַּמִּלְחָמָה וְיוֹרוּהוּ בַּחֲצִים לִזְעֹק רַק עַל נַפְשׁוֹ וְלֹאכֹל
The desire for food and for sexual relations, and the like, and it is not fitting for one who enters into battle, and they shoot him with arrows to cry out only for his own life and to eat.

מַאֲכָלִים רָעִים וְנַעֲשֶׂה מְצֹרָע אוֹ הַמַּרְבֶּה בְּתַשְׁמִישׁ וְנַעֲשֶׂה עִוֵּר לִשְׁוַע רַק עַל סִכְלוּתוֹ וְכֵן תִּרְאֶה מֵהֶם
Evil foods and he becomes a leper, or one who multiplies in sexual intercourse becomes blind to cry out only on his foolishness, and so you will see from them.

כִּי הַנִּכְנָס בְּסַכָּנַת הַמִּדְבָּרוֹת וְהַיַּמִּים כְּדֵי לְהִתְעַשֵּׁר בְּיוֹתֵר עַל שְׁכֵנָיו וּלְהַפְרוֹת בְּרַצֵּי הַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב וְיִמְצָאוּהוּ תְּלָאוֹת
Because the one who enters the danger of the deserts and the seas in order to become richer than his neighbors and to multiply in the streams of silver and gold, and they will find him with troubles.

יֵלֵךְ וְיִשְׁוַע וְיִלּוֹנֵן עַל הַזְּמַן וְיִתְמַהּ מֵרַע מַזָּלוֹ וְהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לֹא יְחַדֵּשׁ מוֹפֵת וְנֵס בָּעוֹלָם
He will go and cry out and lament over the time and be astonished at the evil of his fortune, and the Holy One, blessed be He, will not renew a miracle or a sign in the world.

לַעֲזֹר הַמְּשֻׁגָּעִים עַל פְּחִיתוּת מִדּוֹתֵיהֶם וְעוֹד תָּשׁוּב תִּרְאֶה בָּהֶם כִּי מִי שֶׁאָסַף מִן הַמָּמוֹן דֵּי סַפְקוֹ
To help the insane about the deficiencies of their character, and you will see in them that whoever gathers from the money enough for his needs.

רוֹאֶה עַצְמוֹ פָּחוֹת וְגָרוּעַ מִזַּל מִמִּי שֶׁאָסַף הַפְּנִינִים בְּתוֹךְ גְּנָזָיו וְיִתְלוֹנֵן עַל מַזָּלוֹ וְגַם זֶה מִפְּחִיתוּת
He sees himself as less and worse off than those who gathered the pearls within their treasuries and complain about their luck, and even this is from a deficiency.

הַמִּדּוֹת כִּי הַמַּשִּׂיג אֵלּוּ הַתּוֹסָפוֹת לֹא הִשִּׂיג דָּבָר נוֹסָף בְּעַצְמוֹ וְכֹחוֹ אֲבָל הִשִּׂיג הֲבָלִים אוֹ תַּעְתּוּעִים
The measures, because the one who attains these additions did not attain anything additional in himself and his power, but attained nonsense or delusions.

אוֹ כִּשְׁלוֹן לְעַצְמוֹ וְהַחֲסֵר מֵאֵלֶּה הַתּוֹסָפוֹת אֵינוֹ חָסֵר כְּלוּם לֹא הֶעֱדִיף הַמַּרְבֶּה וְהַמַּמְעִיט לֹא הֶחְסִיר אִישׁ
Or a failure for himself, and the one lacking these additions lacks nothing; the one who adds does not gain, and the one who subtracts does not lose.

לְפִי אָכְלוּ לָקְטוּ וְאֵלֶּה הֵם רַבִּים בְּכׇל זְמַן וּבְכׇל מָקוֹם וּבֶאֱמֶת כִּי הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה הִנֵּה
According to what they ate, they gathered, and these are many at all times and in all places, and truly because the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, here.

יַסֵּר רַבִּים וּבְרַכִּים כּוֹשְׁלוֹת אֶמֶץ עִם מָה שֶׁבֵּאֵר עוֹד שָׁם כִּי הַטּוֹבוֹת הַצְּרִיכוֹת בָּעוֹלָם מְרֻבּוֹת מְאֹד
He chastises many and the weak, strengthening the faltering with what he further explained there, that the good things needed in the world are very numerous.

וְנִמְצָאוֹת הַרְבֵּה בְּכׇל מָקוֹם כְּגוֹן הַמְּחַיָּה בַּמַּיִם וּבַמָּזוֹן הַצָּרִיךְ וְלֹא חָסֵר הָעוֹלָם מִן הַצָּרִיךְ וְאֵין חֶסְרוֹנוֹ
and are found in great numbers in every place, such as the sustenance in water and food that is needed, and the world does not lack the needed, and there is no deficiency.

אלא בתוספות ובעודף על צרכי בני אדם כגון המרגליות והפנינים שאינן נמצאות אלא בקצת הארצות מפני


מִעוּט צֹרֶךְ בְּנֵי אָדָם לָהֶם.
A lack of need for them by human beings.

וְכׇל זֶה רָאוּי לְהַעֲלוֹת עַל לֵב מַשְׂכִּיל כְּדֵי לְהָבִין תַּקּוּן סֵדֶר הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרַךְ בְּעוֹלָמוֹ וְטוּבַת הַהַנְהָגָה
And all this is worthy of being raised in the mind of a wise person in order to understand the arrangement of the Creator, may He be blessed, in His world and the goodness of His governance.

בִּבְרוּאָיו וְכֵן רָאוּי לְהָבִין זֶה כׇּל אָדָם שֶׁרָאוּי לְקַבֵּל תּוֹכָחוֹת אֲבָל עִנְיָן הַשְּׁאִילָה בַּצַּדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ
In His creations and so it is appropriate to understand this every person who is appropriate to receive rebukes, but the matter of borrowing from a righteous person is bad for him.

עֲדַיִן בִּמְקוֹמָהּ עוֹמֶדֶת כִּי אֲנַחְנוּ לֹא נִרְאֶה הָעוֹלָם בְּכֻלּוֹ וְלֹא נַחְקֹר עָלָיו בִּשְׁלֵמוּתוֹ אֲבָל נִשְׁאַל בּוֹ
It still stands in its place because we do not see the world in its entirety and we do not investigate it in its completeness, but we ask about it.

בְּפֵרָט עַל הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה אִם רָאוּי לַמִּקְרֶה הַזֶּה שֶׁבָּא עָלָיו שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא נוֹתֵן לְכׇל גּוֹיָה
In particular about this man, if it is appropriate for this case that came upon him, that the Holy One, blessed be He, gives to every nation.

וְגוֹיָה הָרָאוּי לָהּ וְנִרְאֶה כַּמָּה צַדִּיקִים נֶהֶרְגִין עַל סְפָרֵיהֶם אוֹ כְּשֶׁהֵן יוֹשְׁבִין בְּתַעֲנִית וּמִתְפַּלְּלִין בְּתַכְלִית הַכַּוָּנָה
and her nation that is suitable for her, and it seems how many righteous people are killed for their books or when they are sitting in fasting and praying with the utmost intention.

וְיֵשׁ שֶׁנִּבְרָאִים בִּתְחִלַּת הַבְּרִיאָה חֲסֵרֵי הָאֵיבָרִים וְיֵשׁ מֵתִים קֹדֶם עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וּמִשָּׁעָה שֶׁעָמְדוּ עַל דַּעְתָּם הָיוּ
And there are those who are created at the beginning of creation lacking limbs, and there are those who die before twenty years, and from the time they reached the age of understanding they were.

צַדִּיקִים עוֹסְקִים בַּתּוֹרָה וּבְמִצְוֹת וְיֵשׁ לָהֶם זְכִיּוֹת וְאֵין עִמָּם עֹנֶשׁ שָׁמַיִם כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה
Righteous people engage in Torah and mitzvot, and they have merits, while they do not have heavenly punishment, as our sages of blessed memory said.

(יְרוּשַׁלְמִי בִּכּוּרִים ב א) שֶׁאֵין בֵּית דִּין שֶׁל מַעְלָה עוֹנְשִׁים עַד אוֹתוֹ הַפֶּרֶק וּכְעִנְיַן אִיּוֹב הַצַּדִּיק
that the heavenly court does not punish until that period, and like the matter of righteous Job.

שֶׁאֵירְעוּ לוֹ הַמִּקְרִים הַהֵם וּכְשֶׁאֵילַת מַעֲשֵׂה דְּרַבִּי עֲקִיבָא בְּתוֹרָתוֹ וּבְמִיתָתוֹ (מְנָחוֹת כט ב') וְכׇל שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁאֵילַת
that those events happened to him and when the matter of Rabbi Akiva's deeds in his Torah and death (Menachot 29b) was asked, and all the more so when it was asked.

רָשָׁע וְטוֹב לוֹ שֶׁהוּא מָצוּי יוֹתֵר בָּעוֹלָם וְעִנְיַן הַשְּׁאִילָה הַזֹּאת לֹא תִּקְטַן בִּהְיוֹת נִכְשָׁלֶיהָ מוּעָטִים וְלֹא
A wicked person and it is good for him that he is more common in the world, and the matter of this loan will not be diminished when his failures are few, and not.

תִּגְדַּל בְּהִיוֹתָם רַבִּים כִּי לֹא לָאָדָם שֶׁיַּחְנוּ שֶׁנִּזְכֶּה מַעֲשָׂיו בְּהִיוֹת רֻבָּם טוֹבִים וְלֹא שָׁגָה וְטָעָה בַּדָּבָר
You will increase in size when they are many, because it is not for man to dwell in them, that we may merit his deeds when most of them are good, and he does not err or make a mistake in the matter.

אֶלָּא בְּמִעוּט וְאֵין טַעֲנוֹתֵינוּ אֶלָּא עַל הַצּוּר תָּמִים פְּעָלוֹ כִּי כׇּל דְּרָכָיו מִשְׁפָּט אֵין בָּהֶם נֶפֶתַל
But in a small amount, and our claims are only on the Rock whose works are perfect, because all His ways are justice, there is no deceit in them.

וְעַקָּשׁ וְיִרְאֶה מִדִּבְרֵי הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה שֶׁלֹּא הֻקְשָׁה בְּעֵינָיו דָּבָר בָּרָשָׁע וְטוֹב לוֹ כִּי הוּא מֵחֶסֶד
And he is stubborn and sees from the words of the rabbi, whose memory is blessed, that it was not difficult for him to say something about a wicked person and it is good for him, because it is from kindness.

הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ שְׁמוֹ אֲבָל עִקַּר הַסָּפֵק בַּצַּדִּיק וְרַע לוֹ וְהִנֵּה בֵּאֵר בִּכְלָל שֶׁהָעוֹלָם בְּמַצִּיאוּתוֹ חֶסֶד יִבְנֶה
The Creator, may His name be blessed, but the main doubt is in the righteous and it is bad for him, and behold he explained in general that the world in its existence will build with kindness.

וּמִקְרֵיו וּפְגָעָיו מֵעַצְמָם וְעַל הַצַּדִּיק הָאֹבֵד יַגְזֹר שֶׁהַמִּיתָה בְּחֵטְא וְיִסּוּרִין בְּעָוֹן וְהוּא אֱמֶת עִם מָה שֶׁהוֹסַפְנוּ
and his misfortunes and his troubles from himself, and upon the lost righteous one he will decree that death is in sin and afflictions in iniquity, and it is true with what we have added.

לִכְתֹּב וּלְרַמֵּז לְמַעְלָה וּבָרוּךְ הַיּוֹדֵעַ דִּין אֱמֶת וְשׁוֹפֵט אֱמֶת וְהַצֶּדֶק.
To write and to hint above, and blessed is He who knows true law, true judgment, and justice.

כֵּיוָן שֶׁנִּתְפָּרֵשׁ מִדִּבְרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה שֶׁסּוֹף הָעֹנֶשׁ גֵּיהִנּוֹם וְסוֹף הַשָּׂכָר הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא צְרִיכִין אָנוּ לְפָרֵשׁ
Since it has been explained in the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed, that the end of punishment is Gehenna and the end of reward is the World to Come, we are required to explain.

מִדִּבְרֵיהֶם זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה מַהוּ הַדִּין הַזֶּה שֶׁנִּקְרָא "גֵּיהִנֹּם" וּמָה הַדָּבָר שֶׁנִּדּוֹן בּוֹ וְאֵימָתַי יָדוּן בּוֹ [וְאִם תֹּאמַר]
From their words, may their memory be blessed, what is this law called "Gehenna" and what is the matter that is judged in it and when will it be judged? [And if you say]

שֶׁהָעֹנֶשׁ מַגִּיעַ לְגוּפוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם בְּמִיתָתוֹ וְהֲלֹא גּוּפוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם כְּשֶׁמֵּת אֶבֶן דּוֹמֶם הוּא אִם תִּשְׂרֹף עַצְמוֹתָיו לְסִיד
that the punishment reaches the body of the man in his death, and is not the body of the man when he dies a silent stone? If you burn his bones to lime.

אוֹ תִּמְשַׁח אוֹתָם בְּאַפִּרְסָמוֹן וּמִינֵי [הַבְּשָׂמִים] הַמְּקַיְּמִין אוֹתוֹ אֵין הֶפְרֵשׁ לָאֶבֶן הַזּוֹ בְּכָךְ וּמִקְרֶה אֶחָד לַצַּדִּיק
Or anoint them with spikenard and the kinds of [the spices] that sustain him. There is no difference to this stone in that, and one incident to the righteous.

וְלָרָשָׁע בְּגוּפָן לְאַחַר הַמָּוֶת וְהֵיאַךְ יִהְיֶה זֶה הַגּוּף בְּגֵיהִנּוֹם וְזֶה בְּטוּבַת הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהֲרֵי הֵם קְבוּרִים
And for the wicked in their bodies after death and how will this body be in Gehenna and this in the goodness of the world to come and behold they are buried.

לְפָנֶיךָ בְּקֶבֶר אֶחָד אוֹ גְּנוּזִים בְּבֵיתְךָ בְּתוֹךְ אָרוֹן אֶחָד הֲרֵי שֶׁאֵין עֹנֶשׁ אֶלָּא לַנֶּפֶשׁ וּמַהוּ הָעֹנֶשׁ
Before you in one grave or hidden in your house within one coffin, it is that there is no punishment but to the soul, and what is the punishment?

הַמַּשִּׂיג אוֹתָהּ וְהִנֵּה הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֵינָהּ גּוּף וְגוּיָה וְאֵינָהּ נִתְפַּשֶּׂת בַּמָּקוֹם וְאֵין מְחִיצָה לְפָנֶיהָ וּמָה הוּא הַמָּקוֹם
He who attains her, and behold the soul is not a body and a form, and is not grasped in a place, and there is no partition before it, and what is the place?

הַזֶּה שֶׁנִּקְרָא "גֵּיהִנֹּם" וְנִדּוֹנִית שָׁם אֵין הַמָּקוֹם תּוֹפֵשׁ וְאֵין הָאֵשׁ שׂוֹרֶפֶת אֶלָּא בַּעֲלֵי גּוּף וְהַדְּבָרִים הַמַּמָּשִׁיִּים
This one called "Gehenna" and the one judged there, the place does not hold and the fire does not burn except for those with bodies and the tangible things.

אֵין לְךָ בָּעֹנֶשׁ הַזֶּה אֶלָּא שֶׁתֹּאבֵד הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְתִכָּרֵת וְדָבָר זֶה אֵינוֹ כְּפִי הַתּוֹרָה וְלֹא כְּפִי דַעְתָּם
You have in this punishment only that the soul will be lost and cut off, and this matter is not in accordance with the Torah nor with their opinion.

שֶׁלְּרַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה אֶלָּא דֵּעוֹת נׇכְרִיּוֹת הֵם מִדִּבְרֵי הַמִּתְחַכְּמִים בָּאוּמוֹת הָעוֹלָם שֶׁהֲרֵי לִדְבָרָיו אֵין עׇנְשׁוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם
Because of our great sages, may their memory be blessed, but rather these are foreign opinions from the words of those who are clever in the nations of the world, for according to his words there is no punishment for man.

אֶלָּא כָּרֵת וְהַתּוֹרָה אֵינָהּ מְחַיֶּבֶת כָּרֵת לְכׇל אָדָם וְנִמְצָא פּוֹטֵר בְּטַעֲנָה הַזּוֹ שְׁאַר הַחוֹטָאִים מִן הַדִּין
But a death penalty, and the Torah does not obligate a death penalty for every person, and thus it exempts other sinners from the law with this claim.

וְהָעֹנֶשׁ וְעוֹד לָדַעַת זו עָשִׂיתָ עוֹבֵר עַל כָּרֵת אַחַת וְהָאֶפִּיקוֹרוֹס הַכּוֹפֵר בָּעִקָּר וְשׁוֹפֵךְ דָּמִים כׇּל יָמָיו
and the punishment and also for this you have done you transgress one capital sin, and the Epicurean who denies the fundamental principle and sheds blood all his days.

שָׁוִין בְּדִינֵיהֶם שֶׁהֲרֵי שְׁנֵיהֶם אֲבוּדִים וְאֵין עִמָּם צַעַר וְיִסּוּרִין אַחַר הַמִּיתָה וּכְבָר מְפֹרָשׁ בַּקַּבָּלָה שֶׁהָיוּ בַּכּוֹפְרִים
They are equal in their judgment, for both are lost and have no suffering or torment after death; and it is already stated in the Kabbalah that they were among the unbelievers.

דֵעוֹת הַלָלוּ מֵהֶן שֶׁכּוֹפֵר בְּעֹנֶשׁ וְשָׂכָר שֶׁלְּאַחַר מִיתָה כְּעִנְיָן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בְּיֵצֶר הָרַע "כִּי אֵין מַעֲשֶׂה וְחֶשְׁבּוֹן"
These opinions include those who deny punishment and reward after death, as in the matter stated in the evil inclination: "for there is no action and reckoning."

וְדַעַת וְחָכְמָה בִּשְׁאוֹל אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה הוֹלֵךְ שָׁמָּה" וּמֵהֶם שֶׁלֹּא הָיָה עֻנְשָׁן חָמוּר עֲלֵיהֶם שֶׁלֹּא הָיוּ מוֹדִים
And knowledge and wisdom in Sheol where you are going, and from them whose punishment was not severe upon them because they did not confess.

אֶלָּא בְּאַבְּדָן הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְהָיוּ אוֹמְרִים נוֹחַ לוֹ לָאָדָם שֶׁיֹּאבֵד וְהָיָה כְּלֹא הָיָה וּמִדִּבְרֵי חֲכָמִים אֵין צָרִיךְ
But in the loss of the soul, they would say that it would be better for a person to be lost and be as if he never existed, and from the words of the sages, one does not need.

לְהָבִיא רְאָיָה לְפִי שֶׁכׇּל הַתַּלְמוּד וּמִדְרָשֵׁי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ מְפֹרָשִׁים הֵם בְּעִנְיְנֵי גֵּיהִנּוֹם וְהָעֹנֶשׁ הַהוּא.
To bring proof, because the entire Talmud and the Midrashim of our Sages are explicit in matters of Gehenna and that punishment.

כָּךְ שָׁנוּ בְּמִנְחוֹת (צ"ט ב') "וְאַף הִסִּיתְךָ מִפִּי צַר" וְגוֹ' מִגֵּיהִנּוֹם שֶׁפִּיהָ צַר שֶׁיְּהֵא עִשָּׁנָה צִבּוּר
Thus they taught in Menachot (99b) "And even you were incited from a narrow mouth" etc. from Gehenna whose mouth is narrow so that its smoke will be gathered.

בְּתוֹכָהּ וְשֶׁמָּא תֹּאמַר כְּשֵׁם שֶׁפִּיהָ צַר כָּךְ כֻּלָּהּ צָרָה תַּלְמוּד לוֹמַר "הֶעֱמִיק הִרְחִיב" שֶׁמָּא תֹּאמַר אֵין
Within it, and perhaps you will say: just as its mouth is narrow, so its whole is narrow. The Talmud says to say: 'He deepened and widened.' Perhaps you will say: no.

בָּהּ עֵצִים תַּלְמוּד לוֹמַר "מְדוּרָתָהּ אֵשׁ וְעֵצִים הַרְבֵּה" וְהֵם מָדְדוּ לְגֵיהִנֹּם אֹרֶךְ וְרֹחַב אָמְרוּ בְּתַעֲנִית (י')
In it are trees, as the verse says, "Her fire is a fire of many trees," and they measured the length and width of Gehenna. It is said in the tractate of Ta'anit (10).

א') עוֹלָם אֶחָד מִשִּׁשִּׁים בַּגָּן וְגַן אֶחָד מִשִּׁשִּׁים בְּעֵדֶן וְעֵדֶן אֶחָד מִשִּׁשִּׁים לְגֵיהִנֹּם נִמְצָא כׇּל הָעוֹלָם
One world is one-sixtieth of the Garden, and one Garden is one-sixtieth of Eden, and one Eden is one-sixtieth of Gehenna; thus the entire world is found.

כְּכִסּוּי קְדֵרָה לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְעוֹד סִיְּמוּ לוֹ פְּתָחִים אָמְרוּ בְּעֵרוּבִין (י"ט א') שְׁלוֹשָׁה פְּתָחִים יֵשׁ לוֹ לְגֵיהִנּוֹם
Like the cover of a pot for Gehenna, and they also said that it has openings. It is said in Eruvin (19a) that Gehenna has three openings.

אֶחָד בַּמִּדְבָּר דִּכְתִיב "וְיָרְדוּ הֵם וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר לָהֶם חַיִּים שְׁאוֹלָה" וּלְגֵיהִנָּם יָרְדוּ אֶחָד בַּיָּם כְּתִיב "מִבֶּטֶן".
One in the desert, as it is written "and they went down alive into the pit," and into Gehenna they went down; one in the sea, as it is written "from the womb."

שָׁאוּל שׁוּעָתִי" הֶחְזִיר אוֹתוֹ הַדָּג עַל מַעֲמַקֵּי מְצוּלוֹת וּפָתַח גֵּיהִנָּם וְאֶחָד בִּירוּשָׁלַיִם שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "נָאֹם ה' אֲשֶׁר".
Saul's prayer returned him to the depths of the abyss and opened Gehenna, and one in Jerusalem, as it is said "The word of the Lord".

אוֹר לוֹ בְּצִיּוֹן וְתַנּוּר לוֹ בִּירוּשָׁלַיִם" וְאָמַר רַבָּן יוֹחָנָן בֶּן זַכַּאי שְׁתֵּי תִּימוֹרוֹת יֵשׁ בְּגִי בֶּן.
"Light for him in Zion and an oven for him in Jerusalem," and Raban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said: "There are two clusters of dates in the valley of Ben."

הֵנָּם וְעוֹלֶה עָשָׁן מִבֵּינֵיהֶם וְזוֹ פִּתְחָה שֶׁל גֵּיהִנֹּם וְאָמְרוּ לְעִנְיַן אִסּוּר הַטְמָנָה בְּחַמֵּי טְבֶרְיָא (שַׁבָּת ל"ט א')
They are, and smoke rises from between them, and this is the opening of Gehenna, and they said regarding the prohibition of burying in the hot springs of Tiberias (Shabbat 39a).

תּוֹלְדוֹת אוֹר נִינְהוּ דְּחַלְפָא אַפְּתָחָא דְּגֵיהִנָּם וְעוֹד אָמְרוּ (בָּבָא בַּתְרָא פ"ד א') שֶׁמַע מִינָּה הַאי שִׁמְשָׁא
The generations of light are those that pass through the gate of Gehenna. And they also said (Bava Batra 4:1) that from this we learn that this sun.

סֻמְקָתִי הִיא דְּקָא חָזִינָן לָהּ דְּסַמְקָא בְּצַפְרָא וּבְפַנְיָא וְהַאי דְּחָזִינָן לָהּ דְּחֻורָא בְּפַלְגָא דְּיוֹמָא אֲנַן הוּא
It is my redness that we see her as red in the morning and in the evening, and that which we see her as white in the middle of the day is us.

דְּלָא בְּרִיאָה נְהוֹרִין לְמֶחֱזֵיָּה וְאוֹתִיבוּ עָלָה וּפְרִיקוּ וְאִיתָּמַר הָתָם וּלְמַאי דְּמוֹתְבִינָן מֵעִיקָּרָא הָא קָא חָזִינָן לֵיהּ
that he is not a creature of light to see him, and they sat him down and they released him, and it was said there, and for what we were objecting at first, behold we see him.

דְּסַמְקָא בְּצַפְרָא וּבְפַנְיָא בְּצַפְרָא קָא חָלְפָא אַפְּתָחָא דְּגַן עֵדֶן בְּפַנְיָא קָא חָלְפָא אַפְּתָחָא דְּגֵיהִנָּם וּבְפִרְקֵי רַבִּי
That which is red in the morning and in the evening, in the morning it passes the gate of Paradise, and in the evening it passes the gate of Gehenna, and in the chapters of Rabbi.

אֱלִיעֶזֶר (פֶּרֶק ד) אָמְרוּ בַּשֵּׁנִי בָּרָא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא אֶת הָרָקִיעַ וְהַמַּלְאָכִים וְאֵשׁוֹ שֶׁלְּבָשָׂר וָדָם וְאֵשׁוֹ.
Eliezer (Chapter 4) said that on the second day the Holy One, blessed be He, created the firmament and the angels and the fire of flesh and blood and the fire.

שְׁלָגֵיהֶנָּם וּפֵרְשׁוּ שָׁם שֶׁהָרָקִיעַ הַזֶּה הוּא הָרָקִיעַ שֶׁעַל רָאשֵׁי הַחַיּוֹת שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְדֹמֹת עַל רָאשֵׁי הַחַיּוֹת רָקִיעַ""
Their snow and they explained there that this firmament is the firmament that is over the heads of the animals, as it is said, "And a likeness over the heads of the animals a firmament."

וְאָמְרוּ שָׁם (פֶּרֶק ה') רַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אוֹמֵר עׇבְיָה שֶׁלָּאָרֶץ מַהֲלַךְ שִׁשִּׁים שָׁנָה וְתָהוֹם אֶחָד שֶׁהוּא אֵצֶל
And they said there (Chapter 5) that Rabbi Joshua says: The thickness of the earth is a journey of sixty years, and one abyss which is near.

גיהנם נובע ומוציא חמים תענוג לבני אדם ושנו בברייתא דארכו של עולם במקום הזה שבעה מקומות


זֶה לְמַטָּה מִזֶּה וְהֵן גֵּיהִנֹּם וּשְׁעָרֵי צַלְמוֹת שְׁעָרֵי מָוֶת טִיט הַיּוֹן בּוֹר שַׁחַת שְׁאוֹל וְאַבְּדֹן וּלְמַטָּה
This is lower than that, and they are Gehenna and the gates of darkness, the gates of death, the mud of the abyss, the pit of destruction, Sheol and Abaddon, and lower.

מִכֻּלָּן אַרְקָא וּמַלְאֲכֵי חֲבָלָה מַעֲמִידִין רְשָׁעִים בְּאַרְקָא תַּחַת נְהַר דִּינוּר שֶׁהוּא יוֹצֵא תַּחַת כִּסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר
From all of them, Arka and the angels of destruction set up the wicked in Arka under the river Dinor, which emerges under the throne of glory, as it is said.

(ירמיה כג)


"הנה סערת ה' חמה יצאה וסער מתחולל על ראש רשעים יחול" והיורד לארקא משם שוב אינו


עוֹלֶה וְהֵם נִדּוֹנִין לְדוֹרֵי דוֹרוֹת וְשָׁם שָׁנִינוּ רְשָׁעִים שֶׁבָּהֶם מַלְאֲכֵי חֲבָלָה מְמֻנִּין עֲלֵיהֶם מִדּוֹר הָעֶלְיוֹן שְׁאוֹל
Rising, and they are judged for generations upon generations, and there we have said that the wicked among them are assigned to the angels of destruction from the upper world of Sheol.

תַּחְתִּית עֲמָקוֹ מְהַלֵּךְ שָׁלוֹשׁ מֵאוֹת שָׁנָה וְכׇל מָדוֹר וּמָדוֹר כְּמוֹ כֵן הָאֵשׁ שֶׁלְּשָׁאוּל תַּחְתִּית חָזָק עַל
The bottom of its depth walks three hundred years and each generation and generation likewise the fire of Saul bottom strong on.

אֶחָד מִשִּׁשִּׁים שֶׁלְּאַבֵּדוֹן שֶׁלְּמַעְלָה הֵימֶנּוּ וְכֵן כׇּל מָדוֹר וּמָדוֹר שֶׁלְּמַעְלָה מִמֶּנּוּ כְּמוֹ כֵן זֶהוּ הָעִנְיָן הַשָּׁנוּי
One of sixty of the Abaddon above him, and likewise each and every level above him, is the same matter, the changed matter.

בַּבָּרַיְתָא וְהֶחְזִירוּ הָעִנְיָן בְּמִדְרַשׁ תְּהִלִּים וְאָמְרוּ כׇּל כַּת וְכַת מִשֶּׁבַע כַּתּוֹת יֵשׁ לוֹ מָדוֹר בִּפְנֵי עַצְמוֹ
In the baraita and they returned the matter in the Midrash of Psalms and they said that each group and group from the seven groups has a dwelling place of its own.

בְּגַן עֵדֶן וּכְנֶגֶדָן שִׁבְעָה בָּתֵּי דִּירוֹת לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְאֵלּוּ הֵן כּוּ' הֲרֵי שִׁבְעָה בָּתֵּי דִּירוֹת לָרְשָׁעִים וְשִׁבְעָה
In the Garden of Eden and opposite it seven houses of dwelling for Gehenna, and these are they, etc. Behold, seven houses of dwelling for the wicked and seven.

לַצַּדִּיקִים לְכׇל אֶחָד וְאֶחָד לְפִי מַעֲשָׂיו בָּתֵּי דִּירָתוֹ וּבָאַגָּדָה אָמְרוּ אָמַר רַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֶּן לֵוִי כַּד
To the righteous, to each and each according to his deeds, the houses of his dwelling, and in the aggada they said, said Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, as...

מִשְׁחָנָא בֵּיתָא קַמָּא דִּבְמִדּוּר גֵּיהִנָּם אַשְׁכַּחִית בָּהּ מֵאָה מִילִין בְּאוֹרְכָּא וַחֲמִשִּׁין מִילִין בְּפוּתְיָא וְתַמָּן גּוּבִין גּוּבִין
I saw in the first house of the chamber of Gehenna a hundred milin in length and fifty milin in width, and there were pits within pits.

וְאַרְיוֹן דְּנוּר קַיָּמִין תַּמָּן וְכַד נָפְלִין תַּמָּן בְּנֵי אֱנָשָׁא אָכְלִין יָתוּן אַרְיוֹתָא וּבַתַּר דְּתִיכְלִינוּן אִישְׁתָּא קַיָּמִין
And the lions of fire were standing there, and when men fell there, the lions ate them. And after they had eaten them, they stood.

מֵרֵישָׁא וְרָמוּ יְתָהוּן בְּנוּרָא דְּכׇל בֵּיתָא דְּמָדוּר קַמָּא וּמִשְׁחָנָא בֵּיתָא תַּנִּינָא דְּבִמְדוּר תַּנִּינָא וְאַשְׁכַּחַת בֵּיהּ כְּקַדְמָאָה
From the beginning and they threw them into the fire of all the house of the first dwelling and they anointed the house of the second dwelling in the second dwelling and you found in it as before.

וְשָׁאַלְתָּ בְּגִין בֵּיתָא קַמָּא וְאָמְרִין בְּבֵיתָא קַמָּא אִית בֵּיהּ עֲשָׂר אֻמִּין וְעִמְּהוֹן אַבְשָׁלוֹם וְאוֹמְרִים אֻמָּה לְאֻמָּה
And you asked about the first house, and they said that in the first house there are ten nations, and with them is Absalom, and they say nation to nation.

אִם אֲנַחְנָא סָרַחְנָא דְּלָא קַבִּילְנָא אוֹרַיְתָא אַתּוּן מָה חַבַּתּוּן אֲנַן כּוֹתְבִינָן חוֹבָנָא וְאָמְרִין לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם אִם אַתְּ
If we have sinned in that we did not accept the Torah, what have you done? We write our debt, and we say to Avshalom: if you... (the rest of the sentence is incomplete).

לא קבילת אבהתך קבילו למה לקית כדין אמר להון משום דזלזלית לאבא וקאים מלאכא חד ומחי


לְכׇל חַד וְחַד בְּשׁוּטֵי דְנוּרָא וְהַהוּא דְּמַחֵי יְתֵהוֹן קוֹשִׁיֵּאל שְׁמֵיהּ וְאָמַר רָמוּ יְתֵהוֹן וְרָמוּ יְתֵהוֹן וּמְתֻקָּדִין
For each and every one in the lashes of fire, and the one who strikes them, his name is Kushiel, and he said 'throw them' and they threw them, and they are burned.

בְּנוּרָא וּמַיְתִין חוֹרָנִין וּמַחֲיָא לְהוֹן וְרָמִין יַתְהוֹן לְנוּרָא וְכֵן כׇּל חַד וְחַד עַד דְּמַסְיָמִין כׇּל חַיָּבְיָא
In the fire and they bring others and they strike them and throw them into the fire, and so each one until they finish all the guilty ones.

וּבָתַר כֵּן מְעַיְּלִין אַבְשָׁלוֹם לְמִמְחָא נָפְקָא בַּת קוֹלָא וְאָמְרַת לֹא תִּמְחוּנֵיהּ וְלֹא תִּקְדוּנֵיהּ בְּגִין דְּהוּא מִבְּנֵי
And after that they bring in Absalom to be beaten; a voice came out and said: Do not beat him and do not condemn him, because he is from the sons (of the people).

רְחִימָאֵי דְּאָמְרִין בְּסִינַי נַעֲשֶׂה וְנִשְׁמָע בָּתַר דְּמַסְיְמִין רְשִׁיעַיָּא לְמַמְחֵי וּלְמוֹקֵד נָפְקִין מִן נוּרָא כְּאִלּוּ לֹא אִתּוּקְדוּ
The pious ones who say in Sinai, "We will do and we will hear," after the wicked ones finish to destroy and to burn, they go out from the fire as if they were not burned.

וְעוֹד חוֹזְרִים וְעַבְדִין לְהוֹן שֶׁבַע זְמַנִּין בְּיוֹמָא וּתְלַת בְּלֵילְיָא וְאַבְשָׁלוֹם אִישְׁתַּזִּיב מִכׇּל אִלִּין בְּגִין דְּהוּא בְּרֵיָּה
And they still return and work for them seven times a day and three times at night, and Avshalom escaped from all of them because he is his son.

דְּדוּד וּבְבֵיתָא תְּנִינָא דִּבְמָדוֹר תְּנִינָא אִית בֵּיהּ עֲשָׂר אֻמִּין וְכַדִּין דָּנִין יָתְהוֹן וְדוֹאֵג עִמְּהוֹן וְהַהוּא דְּמָחֵי
David and in the house we learned that in the dormitory we learned that there are ten nations in it, and thus they judge them, and Doeg is with them, and that one who hits.

יִתְהוֹן לְהַטִּיאֵל שְׁמֵיהּ וְדוֹאֵג אִישְׁתַּזִּיב מִכׇּל אֵלִּין דְּהוּא מִבְּנֵי בְּנֵיהוֹן דְּאָמְרִין בְּסִינַי נַעֲשֶׂה וְנִשְׁמָע וּבְבֵיתָא תְּלִיתָאָה
It will be for Hattiel his name and Doeg will be saved from all those who are of his children's children who said at Sinai, "We will do and hear," and in the third house.

אִית בֵּיהּ עֲשָׂר אוֹמִין [וְקֶרַח עִמָּהֶן]
There are ten utterances in it [and Korach with them].

וְכַדִּין דָּנִין יְתֵהוֹן הַהוּא דְּמַחֵי יְתֵהוֹן שִׁפְטִיאֵל שְׁמֵיהּ וְקֹרַח וְכְּנִישַׁתֵּיהּ מִשְׁתַּזִּיב מִכׇּל אֵלִּין בְּגִין דְּאָמְרִי נַעֲשֶׂה
And thus they judge them, that one who strikes them, whose name is Shafatiel, and Korach and his assembly are saved from all these because they say, "We will do it."

וְנִשְׁמַע וּבְבֵיתָא רַבִּיעָאָה כְּדִין דָּנִין יָתְהוֹן וְאִית בֵּיהּ עֲשָׂר אוּמִין וְיַרְבַּעָם עִמְּהוֹן וְהַהוּא דְּמַחֵי יָתְהוֹן מַכְתִּיאֵל
And it was heard, and in the fourth house they judged them, and there were ten nations with them, and Jeroboam was with them, and the one who struck them was Makhtiel.

שמיה וירבעם משתזיב מכל אלין על דעסק באורייתא והוא מבני ישראל דאמרי בסיני נעשה ונשמע וביתא


חֲמִישָׁאֶה כְּדִין דָּנִין יָתְהוֹן וְאַחְאָב עִמְּהוֹן וְהַהוּא דְּמַחֵי יָתְהוֹן חוּטְרִיאֵל שְׁמֵיהּ וְאַחְאָב אִשְׁתַּזִּיב מִכֹּל אִילִין בְּגִין
Fifty like this they judged them, and Ahab with them, and the one who struck them, his name was Hutoriel, and Ahab escaped from all these because.

דְהוּא מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל דְּאָמְרִי בְּסִינַי נַעֲשֶׂה וְנִשְׁמָע וּבְבֵיתָא שְׁתִיתָאָה כְּדִין דָּנִין יָתוּן וּמִיכָה עִמָּהוֹן הַהוּא דְּמַחֵי
He is from the children of Israel who said at Sinai, "We will do and hear," and in the second house they judge them, and Micaiah is with them, that one who strikes.

יִתְהוֹן פּוֹסִיאֵל שְׁמֵיהָ וּמִיכָה אִישְׁתַּזִּיב מִכׇּל אֵלִּין עַל דְּהוּא מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל דְּאָמְרֵי בְּסִינַי נַעֲשֶׂה וְנִשְׁמָע וּבְבֵיתָא
May the name of Posi-el and Micha be saved from all these things, because he is of the children of Israel who said at Sinai, "We will do and hear," and in the house.

שְׁבִיעָאָה כְּדִין דָּנִין יָתְהוֹן וְאֵלִישֶׁע בֶּן אַבּוּיָה עִמְּהוֹן וְהַהוּא דְּמַחֵי יָתְהוֹן דְּלָקִיאֵל שְׁמֵיהּ וְאֵלִישֶׁע מִשְׁתַּזִּיב עַל
The seventh as they judged them, and Elisha ben Abuyah with them, and the one who struck them, whose name is D'Lakiel, and Elisha is saved.

דְהוּא מִבְּנוֹהִי דְמַאן דְּאָמְרִי בְּסִינַי נַעֲשָׂה וְנִשְׁמָע וּבְכׇל שֶׁבַע אַלְפֵי דְאִית בְּכׇל מְדוֹר דָּנִין כׇּל רְשִׁיעַיָא
that he is from those who say that in Sinai they did and heard, and in all seven thousand that are in every court they judge all the wicked ones.

בְּהָאֵיךְ דִּינָא וְלֹא חָזוּן דִּין יַת דִּין בְּגִין חֲשׁוּכָא דְּכׇל חֲשׁוּכָא דְּהֲוָה קֳדָם דְּאִתְבַּרְיָא עָלְמִין תַּמָּן הוּא
In what manner is judgment, and they do not see that judgment because of darkness, that all darkness that was before the worlds were created, there it is.

עַד כָּאן בַּמִּדְרָשׁ וְאֵלּוּ קְצָת הַמְּקוֹמוֹת שֶׁסִּפְּרוּ בָּהֶן עִנְיַן גֵּיהִנּוֹם וְצַעֲרוֹ וְעֻנְשׁוֹ בַּגְּמָרָא וּבַמִּדְרָשִׁים וּמָדְדוּ אֶת
Up to here in the Midrash, and these are some of the places where they told about the matter of Gehenna and its pain and punishment in the Talmud and in the Midrashim, and they measured...

תַּכְנִית וּדְבָרִים הַלָּלוּ וְכַיּוֹצֵא בָּהֶן אֵין לִתְלוֹת אוֹתָם בְּמָשָׁל שֶׁהֲרֵי הִזְכִּירוּ מְקוֹמוֹ וּמִדָּתוֹ אׇרְכּוֹ וְרָחְבּוֹ וְדָנוּ
Such a plan and these matters, and the like, should not be hung on a parable, for they have mentioned its place and its measure, its length and width, and they have judged.

עָלָיו לְעִנְיַן אִסּוּר וְהֶתֵּר וְהוּא מֻזְכָּר לָהֶם בְּעִנְיַן הַדִּינִים וּשְׁאַר כַּמָּה מְקוֹמוֹת שֶׁלֹּא הִזְכַּרְנוּ.
It concerns the matter of prohibition and permission, and it is mentioned to them in the matter of the laws and other several places that we did not mention.

אֶלָּא כָּךְ הִיא קַבָּלַת רַבּוֹתֵינוּ שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא בָּרָא נְפָשׁוֹת שֶׁל צַדִּיקִים וְהֵן בְּלֹא סָפֵק רוּחַ זַכָּה
But this is the tradition of our sages that the Holy One, blessed be He, created the souls of the righteous, and they are without doubt a pure spirit.

וְדַקָּה בְּיוֹתֵר אֵינָהּ גּוּף וְלֹא נִגְבֶּלֶת וְלֹא נִגְדֶּרֶת בַּמָּקוֹם וְלֹא נִתְפַּשָּׂה כִּשְׁאַר הָרוּחוֹת שֶׁתּוֹפְסִין אוֹתָן בַּנּוֹדוֹת
And it is the finest, not a body, not bounded nor defined in place, nor is it grasped like the other winds that are grasped in knots.

אֶלָּא מַכַּת הַמַּלְאָכִים וְנַעֲלִית בְּיוֹתֵר אֵין כָּאן מָקוֹם לְפָרֵשׁ כׇּל הַמּוּשָׂג מִמֶּנָּה וְהַכָּתוּב מֵעִיד עָלֶיהָ "וַיִּפַּח".
But the blow of the angels and the most elevated one, there is no place here to explain the whole concept from it, and the Scripture testifies about it: "And He breathed."

בְּאַפָּיו נִשְׁמַת חַיִּים" וְאָמַר כִּי מִנִּשְׁמַת אֱלוֹהַּ נִתְּנָה וְלֹא מֵהִשְׁתַּלְשֵׁל הַסִּבּוֹת וְרַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה אָמְרוּ שֶׁנִּבְרְאוּ
"In his breath is the breath of life," and he said that it was given from the breath of God, not from the chain of causes. And our sages, may their memory be blessed, said that they were created.

בָּרִאשׁוֹן בִּכְלָל בְּרִיאַת הָאוֹר בִּרְצוֹן הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא שֶׁגָּדֵר זֶה הָעוֹלָם הַשָּׁפֵל וְהַשָּׁמַיִם הָעֶלְיוֹנִים הַזַּכִּים וְכֹל
In the first, in general, in the creation of light, in the will of the Holy One, blessed be He, who bounded this lowly world and the upper pure heavens and all.

צְבָאָם הַגּוּפִיִּים וְהַשִּׂכְלִיִּים וְהוּא יִתְבָּרֵךְ שְׁמוֹ בָּרָא הַמָּקוֹם שֶׁנִּקְרָא גֵּיהִנֹּם וּבָרָא בּוֹ אֵשׁ דַּקָּה מִן הַדַּקָּה
Their physical and intellectual army, and He, blessed be His name, created the place called Gehenna and created in it a fire that is finer than the finest.

שֶׁאֵינָה גּוּף מַמָּשׁ נִתְפָּשׂ תּוֹפֶשֶׁת בַּדְּבָרִים הַדַּקִּים וּמְכַלָּה אוֹתָם וְשָׂם כּוֹחַ הָאֵשׁ הַזּוֹ בְּאוֹתוֹ מָקוֹם הַנִּזְכָּר
that is not a real body grasped, grasping in the thin things and consuming them, and placing the power of that fire in that place that is mentioned.

כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׂם כּוֹחוֹת הַשִּׁכְלִיִּים הַנִּבְדָּלִים שֶׁהֵם מַלְאָכִים לִכְתוּתֵיהֶם בַּשָּׁמַיִם וְהִפְרִישׁוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה בֵּין הָאֵשׁ שֶׁבָּעוֹלָם
When he placed the separate intellectual forces, which are angels, in their ranks in heaven, and our Sages, may their memory be blessed, distinguished between the fire in the world.

הַזֶּה וּבֵין הָאֵשׁ הַהִיא לְדַקּוֹת אוֹתוֹ הָאֵשׁ אָמְרוּ בְּפֶסָחִים (נ"ד א') אוֹר דִּידָן אִיבְּרִי בְּמוֹצָאֵי שַׁבָּת
This and between that fire to burn that fire they said in Pesachim (54a) our light was lit on Saturday night.

וְאוֹר דְּגֵיהִנָּם אִיבְּרִי בַּשֵּׁנִי בַּשַּׁבָּת וְאֵין סָפֵק אַחֲרֵי הַמֵּימְרָה הַזֹּאת שֶׁהֵם רוֹצִים לְהַעֲלוֹת הָאֵשׁ הַהִיא וּלְעַשּׂוֹתָהּ.
And the light of Gehenna was broken on the second Sabbath, and there is no doubt after this statement that they want to raise that fire and make it.

דַּקָּה מִן הַדַּקָּה עַד שֶׁיַּחְסוּ אוֹתָהּ לַהֲבָרָאוֹת בְּיוֹם שֵׁנִי וְהוּא הַיּוֹם שֶׁהֵם מְיַחֲדִין בְּבְרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה וּבְמִדְרָשִׁים
A minute from a minute until they attribute it to the creations on Monday, and it is the day that they single out in Genesis Rabbah and in the Midrashim.

לְבְרִיאַת הַמַּלְאָכִים וְיָדוּעַ הוּא בְּכׇל מַעֲשֵׂה בְּרֵאשִׁית כִּי הַנִּבְרָאִים בָּרִאשׁוֹן דַּקִּים וּקְרוֹבִים לַסִּבָּה הָרִאשׁוֹנָה וּלְיְסוֹד הַמֻּקְדָּם
For the creation of the angels and it is known in all the work of Genesis that those created in the first are subtle and close to the first cause and to the early foundation.

יּוֹתֵר מִן הַנִּבְרָאִים בַּשֵּׁנִי וְכֵן הַשֵּׁנִי מִן הַשְּׁלִישִׁי כַּאֲשֶׁר תִּרְאֶה אֲפִלּוּ בְּפַשְׁטוּת הַכְּתוּבִים וְאֵין סָפֵק לְשׁוּם
More than the created beings in the second, and the second more than the third, as you will see even in the plain sense of the Scriptures, and there is no doubt for any.

אָדָם בָּעוֹלָם כִּי הָאֵשׁ הַזּוֹ שֶׁבָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה אֵינָהּ שׂוֹרֶפֶת הַנֶּפֶשׁ וַאֲפִלּוּ הָאֲוִיר הָעוֹלָמִי הַנִּתְפָּשׂ אֵין הָאֵשׁ
A man in the world because this fire in this world does not burn the soul, and even the worldly air that is perceived, there is no fire.

מְכַלֶּה בּוֹ וְלֹא שׂוֹרֶפֶת אוֹתוֹ וְלֹא שָׁמַעְתִּי לְאֶחָד מִן הַמַּאֲמִינִים אוֹ מִן הַכּוֹפְרִים בֵּין גַּס הַמַּחְשָׁבָה
It consumes it and does not burn it, and I have not heard from any of the believers or the disbelievers, whether of coarse thought.

אוֹ דַק וְעָמוֹק בְּסַבְרָא אֵין אֶחָד מֵהֶם שֶׁיַּאֲמִין בְּהַשָּׂרֵף הַחֲסִיד שֶׁנִּשְׂרְפָה נַפְשׁוֹ וְאָבְדָה בָּאֵשׁ וְגִמּוּלוֹ כָּלָה
Or thin and deep in thought, none of them believes in the burning of the pious one whose soul was burned and lost in the fire and his reward is gone.

וְיֵלֵךְ אֶלָּא שֶׁהָאֵשׁ הַהִיא שֶׁבְּגֵיהִנֹּם שֶׁנַּאֲמִין בָּהּ שֶׁהִיא שׂוֹרֶפֶת הַנְּפָשׁוֹת אֵינָהּ כְּמוֹ אֵשׁ הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּלָל
He will go, but the fire in Gehenna that we believe burns souls is not like the fire of this world at all.

לֹא הָאֵשׁ שֶׁמְּשַׁתְּמְשִׁין בָּהּ כְּגַחֶלֶת וּשְׁלַהֶבֶת וְלֹא הָאֵשׁ הַיְּסוֹדִית אֲשֶׁר בְּגַלְגַּל הָאֵשׁ אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁהוּא
Not the fire that is used like a coal and a flame, nor the elemental fire that is in the wheel of fire, even though it is.

גּוּף דָּק מְאוֹד וְהִיא מִתְחַבֶּרֶת בְּגוּפֵי הַנִּבְרָאִים עִם הִשְׁתַּלְשְׁלוּת הַיְּסוֹדוֹת אֶלָּא דַּקָּה מִזּוֹ הִיא וְאַף עַל
A very thin body, and it connects with the bodies of the created beings with the succession of the elements, but it is thinner than this, and even upon.

פִּי שֶׁהִיא מֵעִנְיָנָה כְּמוֹ שֶׁאֲבָאֵר וְכֶבֶר הִזְכַּרְתִּי מָה שֶׁאָמְרוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה עַל אֶחָד מֵאֲשֵׁי מָקוֹם
Because it is from its matter like I will explain, and I have already mentioned what our sages, may their memory be blessed, said about one of the angels of place.

הָעֹנֶשׁ הַזֶּה שֶׁהוּא נָהָר שֶׁל אֵשׁ הַיּוֹצֵא מִתַּחַת כִּסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד הֲרֵי שֶׁמַּעֲלִים דַּקּוּתוֹ עַד כִּסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד שֶׁהוּא
This punishment, which is a river of fire that comes out from under the throne of glory, behold, they raise its fineness up to the throne of glory, which is.

יְסוֹד כׇּל נִבְרָא וְהַפְּנִימִי מִכֻּלָּם וְכֵן הַכָּתוּב עַצְמוֹ עִילָה אוֹתוֹ עַד לְאֵין תַּכְלִית שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בָּאֵשׁ הַזֶּה
The foundation of every created being and the innermost of all, and likewise the scripture itself elevated it to no end, as it is said in this fire.

(ישעיה ל לג)


נִשְׁמַת ה' כְּנַחַל גַּפְרִית בּוֹעֶרֶת בָּהּ" כְּמוֹ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בִּבְרִיאַת הַנֶּפֶשׁ "וַיִּפַּח בְּאַפָּיו נִשְׁמַת חַיִּים" וּכְפִי מָה
The soul of the Lord is like a stream of sulfur burning within it, as it is said in the creation of the soul, "And He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life," and according to what.

שֶׁרָמַזְנוּ לְמַעְלָה וְכֵן בְּפִרְקֵי רַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר (פֶּרֶק ד) מַזְכִּירִין בִּבְרִיאַת יוֹם שֵׁנִי הָרָקִיעַ שֶׁעַל רָאשֵׁי הַחַיּוֹת
As we hinted above and similarly in the chapters of Rabbi Eliezer (chapter 4) they mention in the creation of the second day the firmament that is over the heads of the animals.

וְהַמַּלְאָכִים וְאֵשׁוֹ שֶׁל גֵּיהִנֹּם זָכַר הַדְּבָרִים הַנִּבְרָאִים הַדַּקִּים וְהַשְּׂכָלִים הַנִּבְדָּלִים עִם הָאֵשׁ הַזּוֹ וּגְדוֹלָה מֵהֶן אָמְרוּ בַּגְּמָרָא
And the angels and the fire of Gehenna remembered the created things, the fine ones, and the separated intellects with this fire, and greater than them said in the Gemara.

בְּפֶרֶק אֵין דּוֹרְשִׁין (חֲגִיגָה יג ב') גַּבֵּי נְהַר דִּינוּר מְהֵיכָא שָׁקֵיל מִזִּיעָתָן שֶׁל חַיּוֹת וּלְהֵיכָן שָׁפֵיךְ עַל
In the chapter "Ein Doreshin" (Chagigah 13b) regarding the River Dinor, from where does it draw from the sweat of the animals and where does it pour out?

רֹאשׁ רְשָׁעִיָּא דִּבְגֵיהִנֹּם וְאָמְרוּ בְּפֶרֶק הֵיכָלוֹת רַבִּי יִשְׂמָעֵאל שֶׁנִּשְׁבַּע הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עַל אוֹתוֹ רָשָׁע לוֹפִינוּס
The head of the evil one in Gehenna, and they said in the chapter of the Palaces that Rabbi Yishmael swore that the Holy One, blessed be He, swore upon that evil one Lopinus.

קֵיסָר שֶׁהָרַג עֲשָׂרָה הֲרוּגֵי מְלוּכָה שֶׁהוּא מַטְעִימוֹ טַעַם אוֹר וְגַחֲלֵי אֵשׁ כְּרוּבִים וְאוֹפַנִּים וְחַיּוֹת הַקֹּדֶשׁ שׂוֹרְפִים
Caesar who killed ten royal victims, who is flavoring them with the taste of light and coal fire, cherubim and wheels and holy animals burning.

לְאוֹתוֹ רָשָׁע בְּגֵיהִנָּם וְדָבָר זֶה גָּדוֹל וּמְפֹרָשׁ וּבְבֶרֶשִׁית רַבָּה (פֶּרֶק כ"א י"ג י"ד) אָמְרוּ וַיִּשְׁכֵּן מִקֶּדֶם
To that wicked one in Gehenna, and this matter is great and explicit, and in Bereishit Rabbah (chapter 21, 13-14) they said, 'And He dwelt in the east.'

לְגַן עֵדֶן דָּבָר אַחֵר "מִקֶּדֶם" קֹדֶם לְגַן עֵדֶן נִבְרְאוּ הַמַּלְאָכִים שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר הִיא הַחַיָּה אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי תַּחַת
To the Garden of Eden, another thing: "from the beginning" before the Garden of Eden, the angels were created, as it is said: "It is the animal which I saw under."

אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּנָהַר כֶּבֶר וְיָדַעְתִּי כִּי כְּרוּבִים הֵמָּה "וְאֶת לַהַט הַחֶרֶב" עַל שֵׁם מְשָׁרְתָיו אֵשׁ לוֹהֶטֶת "הַמִּתְהַפֶּכֶת"
The God of Israel in the river Kebar, and I knew that they were cherubim, 'and the flaming sword' on the name of His servants, a burning fire, 'the turning'.

שֶׁהֵן מִתְהַפְּכִין פַּעֲמִים אֲנָשִׁים פַּעֲמִים נָשִׁים פַּעֲמִים רוּחוֹת פַּעֲמִים מַלְאָכִים דָּבָר אַחֵר "מִקֶּדֶם" קֹדֶם לְגַן עֵדֶן
that they are turned sometimes men, sometimes women, sometimes spirits, sometimes angels. Another thing: 'from the beginning' before the Garden of Eden.

נִבְרֵאת גֵּיהִנֹּם גֵּיהִנֹּם נִבְרֵאת בַּשֵּׁנִי וְגַן עֵדֶן בַּשְּׁלִישִׁי "וְאֶת לַהַט הַחֶרֶב הַמִּתְהַפֶּכֶת" עַל שֵׁם "וְלַהֵט אוֹתָם"
Gehenna was created, Gehenna was created on the second day, and the Garden of Eden on the third day; "and the flaming sword that turns" is named after "and they will burn them."

הַיּוֹם הַבָּא" וְגוֹ' אֵלּוּ שְׁתֵּי לְשׁוֹנוֹת לְגֵיהִנָּם וּלְיְסוֹד הָאֵשׁ שֶׁבּוֹ שֶׁהֵם מַלְאָכִים וּכְרוּבִים שֶׁתַּחַת הַכִּסֵּא וְכֹל
"The coming day" and so on, these are two expressions for Gehenna and the foundation of the fire within it, which are angels and cherubs beneath the throne and all.

אֵלּוּ הַדְּבָרִים רוֹמְזִים עִקָּר גָּדוֹל בָּזֶה וְאַחֲרֵי זֶה נֶאֱמַר שֶׁבּוֹרֵא הַנְּשָׁמוֹת הַזַּכּוֹת וְהַטְּהוֹרוֹת יִתְבָּרֵךְ שְׁמוֹ יֵשׁ
These things hint at a great principle in this, and after this it is said that the Creator of the righteous and pure souls, may His name be blessed, exists.

בְּיְכֹלְתּוֹ לִבְרֹא לָהֶן אֵשׁ דַּקָּה שֶׁאֵינָה גּוּף נִתְפָּשׂ שׂוֹרֶפֶת דְּבָרִים דַּקִּים שֶׁאֵינָם גּוּף וּמְכַלָּה אוֹתָם שֶׁאֵין
In his power to create for them a fine fire that is not a tangible body, burning fine things that are not a body and consuming them that are not.

הַכְחָשָׁה לְאַחַר שֶׁיּוֹדֶה בִּבְרִיאַת הַנֶּפֶשׁ בִּרְצוֹנוֹ יִתְבָּרֵךְ שֶׁלֹּא יְהֵא אֶפְשָׁר לְהִמָּצֵא דָּבָר דַּק כְּמוֹהָ מֻנָּח כְּנֶגֶדָהּ
Denial after he will acknowledge the creation of the soul in the will of the Blessed One, that it will not be possible to find a thing as fine as it lying opposite it.

לְכַלּוֹתָהּ וְכֵן אוֹמְרִים רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (שְׁמוֹת רַבָּה י ח) בַּמַּלְאָכִים עַצְמָן שֶׁנִּשְׂרָפִין בְּנָהַר דִּינוּר וְהִזְכִּירוּ
To destroy it, and so our sages, may their memory be blessed, say (Sh'mot Rabbah 10:8) that even the angels themselves are burned in the River of Fire, and they mention...

אֵשׁ אוֹכֶלֶת אֵשׁ
A fire consumes fire.

וְאִם יַקְשׁוּ עָלֵינוּ הֵיאַךְ הַנֶּפֶשׁ נִגְבֶּלֶת בַּמָּקוֹם הַהוּא הַנִּקְרָא גֵּיהִנּוֹם אוֹ שְׁאוֹל נָשִׁיב לָהֶם עִם כֹּל
And if they ask us how the soul is bound in that place called Gehenna or Sheol, we will answer them with all...

עֹמֶק פִּילוֹסוֹפִי הַיּוֹנִים וּפִתּוּיֵי הַכַּשְׂדִּים וְהַהֲגִירִים שֶׁאוֹמְרִים אֵין הַנֶּפֶשׁ נִגְבֶּלֶת בַּמָּקוֹם וְאֵין לָהּ מִשְׁכָּן בַּמּוֹחַ אוֹ
the depth of philosophical thought of the Greeks and the temptations of the Chaldeans and the immigrants who say that the soul is not limited in place and does not have a dwelling in the brain.

בלב רק שהם מקומות נרמזים לשימוש השכל ההוא ואנחנו עם כל זה לא נשיא שכלנו שלא


יִהְיֶה בְּגוּף רְאוּבֵן זֶה מִן הַבְּרִיָּה הַדַּקָּה הַזּוֹ הַנִּקְרֵאת נַפְשׁוֹ יוֹתֵר מִמָּה שֶׁיֵּשׁ מִן הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא
May there be in Reuven's body from this fine creation called his soul more than what there is from that soul.

בְּמוֹחַ הַחֲמוֹר אוֹ בְּעָנָף הָאִילָן וְשֶׁלֹּא תִּהְיֶה נַפְשִׁי בְּגוּפִי נִצְמֶדֶת יוֹתֵר מִמָּה שֶׁנַּפְשִׁי נִצְמֶדֶת בְּגוּפוֹ שֶׁל
In the donkey's brain or in the branch of the tree, and that my soul will not be attached to my body more than my soul is attached to his body.

חֲבֵרִי וְיִהְיֶה מִשְׁכָּנָה בִּי בִּמְקוֹמָה אוֹ שֶׁלֹּא בִּמְקוֹמָה מִפְּנֵי שֶׁהִיא אֵינָה גּוּף וְאֵין מָקוֹם עַל דִּקְדּוּק
My friend, and her dwelling will be in me in her place or not in her place because she is not a body and there is no place on grammar.

לְשׁוֹנָם לְדַבֵּר שֶׁאֵין לָהּ גּוּף אֲבָל עַל כׇּל פָּנִים נֶפֶשׁ שׁוֹכֶנֶת בִּי וְיִהְיֶה חִבּוּרָהּ בְּגוּפִי כְּדִבְרֵי
Their language to speak that does not have a body, but in any case a soul dwells in me, and its connection in my body will be like my words.

קְצָת חוֹקְרֵיהֶם שֶׁאוֹמְרִים כִּי נִקְשְׁרָה בְּרִיָּה דַּקָּה הַזֹּאת הָרוּחָנִית הַמְּאִירָה בְּרוּחַ חַיִּים וְהִיא אֶצְלָם נֶפֶשׁ אַחֶרֶת
Some of their researchers who say that this fine spiritual being, which shines in the spirit of life, is in their view another soul.

בָּאָדָם וְנִצְמְדוּ שְׁתֵּי הַנְּפָשׁוֹת הַדַּקָּה קַיֶּמֶת בַּגַּסָּה מִמֶּנָּה בַּעֲלַת הַתְּנוּעָה הַנִּמְסֶכֶת בְּחֹם הַטִּבְעִי בַּדָּם וְהַצֶּמֶד שְׁתֵּיהֶן
In man and the two souls were attached; the subtle one exists in the gross one from it, the one with movement that is mixed in the natural heat in the blood and the bond of both.

כְּהֶקְשֵׁר הַשַּׁלְהֶבֶת לַפְּתִילָה עִם שֶׁמֶן הַדַּק דַּקּוּת בֵּינוֹנִי בֵּין שְׁנֵיהֶם אוֹ יִהְיֶה בָּעִנְיָן בְּדֶרֶךְ אַחֵר כְּמוֹ
As the connection of the flame to the wick with thin oil, a moderate minute between them, or it will be in the matter in another way like...

שֶׁיִּרְצוּ וְיַרְחִיבוּ לְשׁוֹנָם בְּדִקּוּת מִלּוֹת וּבִגְעָרוֹת לַחוֹלֵק עֲלֵיהֶם וְקוֹרְאִים הַנּוֹטֶה מִדְּבָרֵיהֶם פֶּתִי וְסָכָל שֶׁאֵינוֹ יוֹדֵעַ וּמֵבִין
that they will desire and expand their language with the subtlety of words and with rebukes for those who disagree with them, and they call anyone who deviates from their words a fool and a simpleton who does not know and understand.

אֲבָל עַל כׇּל פָּנִים מִי שֶׁשָּׁכַן בַּחֹמֶר הַזֶּה וְהִצְמִיד בֵּינָהּ וּבֵין הַגּוּף יָכוֹל לְהַגְבִּיל אוֹתָהּ בַּמָּקוֹם
But in any case, whoever dwells in this material and attaches it to the body can limit it in place.

הַהוּא וּלְחַבֵּר בֵּינָהּ וּבֵין הָאֵשׁ הַדַּקָּה שֶׁבְּאוֹתוֹ מָקוֹם שֶׁהִיא מִן הַכַּת הָעֶלְיוֹנָה וְנִבְרָא עַל זֶה הָעִנְיָן
That one and to join it with the thin fire that is in that place which is from the upper group and was created for this matter.

שֶׁתִּכְלֶה הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְתִשְׁתַּנֶּה בַּמַּצְרֵף הַהוּא אוֹ הַכִּלָּיוֹן הַחָרוּץ.
that the soul will end and change in that crucible or the sharp annihilation.

וְכֶבֶר בָּא בַּמּוֹרֶה הַנְּבוּכִים (ב א) מַאֲמָר מִן הַפִילוֹסוֹפִים כִּי הָאָדָם כְּשֶׁתְּנִיעֵהוּ נַפְשׁוֹ שֶׁהִיא צוּרָתוֹ לַעֲלוֹת
And already in The Guide for the Perplexed (II, 1) there is a statement from the philosophers that when a person's soul, which is his form, moves him to ascend.

מִן הַבַּיִת אֶל הָעֲלִיָּה נֶאֱמַר כִּי גּוּפוֹ הוּא אֲשֶׁר הִתְנוֹעֵעַ בְּעַצְמוֹ כִּי הַנֶּפֶשׁ הִיא הַמְּנִיעַ הָרִאשׁוֹן
From the house to the upper story it was said that his body is what moved in itself, because the soul is the first mover.

בְּעַצְמָהּ אֶלָּא שֶׁהִיא הִתְנוֹעֲעָה בְּמִקְרֶה כִּי כְּשֶׁהֶעְתִּיק הַגּוּף מִן הַבַּיִת אֶל הָעֲלִיָּה הִתְנוֹעֲעָה עִמּוֹ הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֶל
In herself, except that she moved by chance, because when the body was moved from the house to the upper floor, the soul moved with it.

הָעֲלִיָּה וְאִם תִּשְׁקֹט הַנַּעַת הַנֶּפֶשׁ יִשְׁקֹט הַמִּתְנוֹעֵעַ בִּשְׁבִילָה וְהוּא הַגּוּף וְאִם יִשְׁקֹט הַגּוּף תָּסִיר הַתְּנוּעָה הַמִּקְרִית
The ascent, and if the movement of the soul will be quiet, the one who moves because of it will be quiet, and it is the body, and if the body will be quiet, you will remove the incidental movement.

אֲשֶׁר יֵשׁ לַנֶּפֶשׁ עַד כָּאן לְשׁוֹנוֹ וּכְבָר אָמַר עוֹד קְצָת מִשְּׂכִילֵיהֶם אֵין בַּעַל חֹמֶר יָכוֹל לְהַשִּׂיג
That which the soul has up to here his language and he already said more some of their wise men, a materialist cannot achieve.

הַשָּׂגָה שְׁלֵמָה עַל אֵיזֶה צַד יִהְיֶה הַנִּפְרָד סִבָּה לְמַצִּיאוּת בַּעַל חֹמֶר אוֹ לְמַצִּיאוּת כּוֹחַ מִכּוֹחוֹתָיו אוֹ
A complete grasp on which side the separated one will be a cause for the existence of a material being or for the existence of a force from his forces, or.

פְּעֻלָּה מִפְּעֻלּוֹתָיו כִּי זֶה הוּא יוֹתֵר נֶעֱלָם בָּהֶם מֵהֶעְלֵם עוֹלוּם לֹא מֶחְקָרֵיהֶם בְּמָצְאָם חִבּוּר הַנִּפְרָדִים עִם
An action from his actions because this is more hidden in them than the hidden world, not their researches in finding the connection of the separated with.

בְּעָלֵי הַחֹמֶר בְּסִבָּה וּבְפֹעַל וְהוּא חִבּוּר עַל כׇּל פָּנִים וּכְבָר יָצָאנוּ לְעִנְיָן אָסוּר בַּחֲקִירָה הַזֹּאת מִפְּנֵי
The owners of the matter in cause and in action, and it is a composition on all accounts, and we have already gone out to a forbidden matter in this investigation because of.

הַמִּתְגַּאִים עַל יוֹצְרָם לְהִתְחַכֵּם בְּתוֹךְ מַעֲשָׂיו וְסוֹדוֹת יְצִירוֹתָיו הַנִּפְלָאִים וְהֵם לֹא יָדְעוּ בִּנְיַן גּוּפָם בְּכׇל מֶחְקָרֵיהֶם
Those who boast about their Creator to become clever within His works and the secrets of His wondrous creations, and they do not know the structure of their own bodies in all their investigations.

אַף כִּי נַפְשָׁם וּמַדּוּעַ יִתְפָּאֲרוּ עַל קַבָּלָתֵנוּ בְּעָשׂוֹתָם הַנֶּפֶשׁ דַּקָּה וְיִתְאָרוּ אוֹתָהּ בְּמִלּוֹת וּסִפּוּרִים מַלְאָכִיִּים כִּי
Even though their soul, and why would they boast about our acceptance when they make the soul thin and describe it with words and angelic stories, because...

לֹא רָאִינוּ יְחוּסָהּ בְּחִבּוּרֵיהֶם רַק לְגַלְגַּל הַשֵּׂכֶל אוֹ לִבְעָלֵי הָעִיּוּן שֶׁלָּהֶם לִכְתַּת הַמַּלְאָכִים וַאֲנַחְנוּ עַל קַבָּלָה
We did not see her lineage in their compositions, only to the wheel of intellect or to the contemplatives of their own, to the order of angels, and we are on tradition.

אֲמִתִּית מֵאֲבוֹת הַקְּדוֹשִׁים שֶׁלֹּא הִשְׂפִּיקוּ בְּיַלְדֵי נׇכְרִים מַעֲלִים אוֹתָהּ וּמְדַקְדְּקִים עִנְיָנָה מֵאֵלֶּה עַד לַהַרְבֵּה עַד שֶׁיֹּאמְרוּ
A truth from the holy ancestors who did not suffice in the children of foreigners, they raise it and examine its meaning from these until many, until they say.

רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה עָלֶיהָ דִּבֵּר כְּאִלּוּ [דַּעְתָּם] נוֹטָה שֶׁלֹּא נִבְרְאָה אָמְרוּ בְּבְרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה (ח י) "עַד"
Our rabbis, may their memory be blessed, spoke about her as if their opinion was that she was not created. They said in Bereishit Rabbah (8:10) "until".

שֶׁהַמֶּלֶךְ בְּמְלָאכָתוֹ יָשַׁב שָׁם עִם מֶלֶךְ מַלְכֵי הַמְּלָכִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא יָשְׁבוּ נַפְשׁוֹתֵיהֶן שֶׁלַּצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁבָּהֶן נִמְלַךְ
That the king in his work sat there with the King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, and the souls of the righteous in whom He consulted sat.

"וּבְרָא הָעוֹלָם" וּמִי שֶׁיִּשְׁמַע זֶה הַמִּמְרָה בֵּין שֶׁיִּזְכֶּה לְפֵרוּשָׁהּ אוֹ שֶׁלֹּא יֵדַעֶנּוּ מִכׇּל מָקוֹם יַכִּיר מִכָּאן
"And He created the world," and whoever hears this statement, whether he merits its interpretation or not, from any place he will recognize from here.

שֶׁאֵין דַּקּוּת הַנֶּפֶשׁ לְפִילוֹסוֹפֵי הָאֻמּוֹת וּלְנִגְרָרִים אַחֲרֵיהֶם יוֹתֵר מִדַּקּוּתָהּ אֵצֶל רַבּוֹתֵינוּ וְלֹא כְּמוֹתוֹ אַף עַל פִּי
That the subtlety of the soul is not greater for the philosophers of the nations and those who follow them than its subtlety among our sages, and it is not like it even though.

שֶׁלֹּא הִבְהִילוּ אֶת הַלּוֹמְדִים בְּמִלּוֹת נֶאֱמָרוֹת בְּמִסְפָּר וּבְחֹמֶר עִנְיָן וְעִם כׇּל זֶה יַאֲמִינוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ כִּי אֵשׁ
That they did not rush the learners with words spoken in number and in matter of subject, and with all this our sages will believe that fire.

שְׁלָגֵי-הֲנָם וְאַבְּדוֹן שׁוֹלֶטֶת בָּהֶן בִּרְצוֹן הָעוֹשֶׂה הַכֹּל יִתְבָּרֵךְ.
The snows of hell and destruction rule over them by the will of the One who does everything, may He be blessed.

וְעַכְשָׁו יֵשׁ לְפָרֵשׁ הָעֹנֶשׁ הַגָּדוֹל שֶׁהוּא הַכָּרֵת וְהוּא בֶּאֱמֶת אַבְדָּן הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְכָךְ אָמְרוּ בַּסִּפְרָא (אֱמוֹר י"ד ד')
And now there is to interpret the great punishment which is karet, and it is truly the loss of the soul; and thus they said in the Sifra (Emor 14:4).

לְפִי שֶׁהוּא אוֹמֵר "כָּרֵת" בְּכׇל מָקוֹם וְאֵינִי יוֹדֵעַ אֵיזֶהוּ תַּלְמוּד לוֹמַר "וְהַאֲבַדְתִּי אֶת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא" לָמֵד
Because it says "cut off" everywhere, and I do not know which one, the verse "and I will destroy that soul" teaches.

עַל הַכֶּרֶת שֶׁאֵינוֹ אֶלָּא אַבֶּדֶן אֶלָּא שֶׁהָאַבֶּדֶן הַזֶּה אֵינוֹ בְּלֹא עֹנֶשׁ וְצַעַר שֶׁיָּמוּת הָרָשָׁע וְתֹאבַד נַפְשׁוֹ
About the knowledge that is nothing but loss, except that this loss is not without punishment and pain, that the wicked will die and his soul will be lost.

וְתָשׁוּב כְּנֶפֶשׁ בְּהֵמָה אוֹ תִּתְבַּטֵּל לְגַמְרֵי כִּי זֹאת הַבְּרִיָּה הַחַיָּה אִי אֶפְשָׁר שֶׁתֹּאבַד מֵאֵלֶיהָ בְּאוֹבְדַן הַגּוּף
And it will return like the soul of a beast, or it will be completely nullified, because this living creature cannot be lost on its own in the loss of the body.

כְּמוֹ שֶׁאִי אֶפְשָׁר לְאֶחָד מִן הַמַּלְאָכִים לְהִבָּטֵל בְּבִטּוּל אֶחָד גּוּפֵי מֵהַנִּבְרָאִים אִם גַּלְגַּל אוֹ זוּלָתוֹ וְאִי
Like it is impossible for one of the angels to be nullified in the nullification of one of the bodies from the creations whether a sphere or something else and not.

אֶפְשָׁר שֶׁתָּשׁוּב כְּנֶפֶשׁ הַבְּהֵמָה וְתִתְבַּטֵּל כִּי נֶפֶשׁ הַבְּהֵמָה תָּשׁוּב לְיְסוֹדָהּ שֶׁהוּא הָאֲוִיר וְהַיְּסוֹדוֹת כִּשְׁאַר כׇּל הַדְּבָרִים
It is possible that the soul of the animal will return and be nullified, because the soul of the animal returns to its foundation, which is the air, and the elements like all other things.

הַגּוּפִיִּים הַשָּׁבִים לְיְסוֹדָם וְעַפְרָם בֵּין דַּקִּים בֵּין גַּסִּים וְלֹא אָבַד דָּבָר מִיּוֹם שֶׁנִּבְרָא הָעוֹלָם וְעַד עַכְשָׁו
The bodies that return to their foundation and their dust, whether fine or coarse, and no thing is lost from the day the world was created until now.

רַק בְּעִנְיָן הַזֶּה לְהִתְגַּלְגֵּל וְלָשׁוּב אֶל יְסוֹדוֹ וְהוּא אַבְדָן כׇּל הָאוֹבְדִים כׇּל זְמַן קִיּוּם הָעוֹלָם כׇּל
Only in this matter to be reincarnated and return to its foundation, and it is the loss of all the lost ones, all the time of the existence of the world.

שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁזֹּאת הַנֶּפֶשׁ שֶׁהִיא עֶלְיוֹנָה אִי אֶפְשָׁר שֶׁתִּהְיֶה בַּטְּלָה וְאֹבֶדֶת וְלֹא שֶׁתָּשׁוּב בְּהֵמִית וְתִצְטָרֵף אֶל הַיְּסוֹדוֹת
For it is that this soul, which is superior, cannot be idle and lost, nor return to bestiality and be joined to the elements.

הָאַרְבַּע שֶׁאֵינָן מֵהֶן כִּי זֶה אֵינוֹ אֱמֶת בַּקַּבָּלָה וְהוּא רָחוֹק מְאוֹד אֶל הָעִיּוּן מִכֹּל מַה שֶּׁבִּטְּלוּהוּ
The four that are not from them, because this is not truth in Kabbalah, and it is very far from contemplation of all that they have nullified.

הַמִּתְחַכְּמִים וְאִם הִיא תָּשׁוּב אֶל יְסוֹדָהּ כְּתוֹלְדַת הַנִּבְרָאִים בַּעֲלֵי הַהֲוָיָה וְהַהֶפְסֵד שֶׁהֵם שָׁבִים לִיסוֹדָם אַשְׁרֶיהָ וְטוֹב
The clever ones, and if she returns to her foundation like the birth of the created beings who have existence and loss, who return to their foundation, her happiness and goodness.

לֹה כִּי הוּא הַשָּׂכָר הַגָּדוֹל וְהַגְּמוּל הַנִּכְבָּד אֲבָל עִנְיָן זֶה כֻּלּוֹ מִמָּה שֶׁנִּזְכַּר לְמַעְלָה מִדִּבְרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ
For it is the great reward and the noble recompense, but this whole matter is from what was mentioned above from the words of our sages.

זיכרונם לברכה שחייבי העונש בגיהנם י"ב חודש לפי הראוי להם לאחר גמר דינם נשמתן נשרפת והם


נַעֲשִׂים אֵפֶר כְּלוֹמַר נִדּוֹנִין שֶׁנִּתְבַּטְּלָה יְצִירָתָן מִמָּה שֶׁהָיְתָה כְּדָבָר הַנִּשְׂרָף הַמּוּשָׁב לְאֵפֶר וְרוּחַ הָאֱלֹהִים וְהוּא רוּחַ
They become ash, that is, they are judged, whose creation was nullified from what it was, like a thing that is burned, turned into ash; and the spirit of God, which is the spirit.

הַנָּחָה וְרָצוֹן מְפַזְּרָתָן תַּחַת כַּפּוֹת רַגְלֵי הַצַּדִּיקִים כְּלוֹמַר בְּמַדְרֵגָה שֶׁהִיא לְמַטָּה מֵעֹנֶג הַצַּדִּיקִים וּמְנוּחָתָן וְהִיא מַדְרֵגָה
A resting place and desire that scatters them under the feet of the righteous, meaning in a level that is below the delight and rest of the righteous, and it is a level.

שֶׁאֵין לָהּ בָּהּ עֹנֶשׁ וְצַעַר כְּבַתְּחִלָּה וְלֹא נֹעַם וְעֹנֶג הַצַּדִּיקִים וְהַמִּצְפַּצְּפִים וְעוֹלִים שֶׁהִזְכִּירוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה
that there is no punishment and sorrow in it as before, nor the pleasure and delight of the righteous and those who ascend, which our sages, may their memory be blessed, mentioned.

עוֹלִין לְאַחַר דִּינָם לְמַדְרֵגָה שֶׁיֵּשׁ בָּהּ מְנוּחָה וְעֹנֶג וְלֹא כְּעִנְיַן הַצַּדִּיקִים אָמְרוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת שַׁבָּת (קנ"ב ב')
They ascend after their judgment to a level that has rest and pleasure in it, not like the matter of the righteous, as they said in tractate Shabbat (152b).

אֵלּוּ וְאֵלּוּ בֵּין שֶׁלָּרְשָׁעִים בֵּין שֶׁלְּבֵינוֹנִים לְדוֹמָה נִמְסָרוֹת הַלָּלוּ יֵשׁ לָהֶם מְנוּחָה וְהַלָּלוּ אֵין לָהֶם מְנוּחָה
These and those, whether of the wicked or of the mediocre, are handed over to a parable; these have rest and those do not have rest.

וְכִמּוֹ שֶׁאָנוּ עֲתִידִין לְבָאֵר וְהָרְשָׁעִים הַגְּמוּרִים הַחֲמוּרִים שֶׁנִּדּוֹנִין לְדוֹרוֹת דּוֹרוֹת רְצוֹן הָאָדוֹן יִתְבָּרֵךְ מְקַיֵּם אוֹתָן וְדָן
And just as we are destined to clarify, and the completely wicked, severe sinners who are judged for generations upon generations, the will of the Lord, may He be blessed, sustains them and judges them.

הַנְּפָשׁוֹת הֵם בְּעֹנֶשׁ וְצַעַר שֶׁאֵינוֹ מְכַלֶּה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַחֹטֵאת הַהִיא כְּדִכְתִיב "כִּי תּוֹלַעְתָּם לֹא תָּמוּת וְאִישָׁם לֹא תִּכְבֶּה"
Those souls in punishment and pain that does not destroy the sinful soul, as it is written "for their worm does not die and their fire is not quenched."

אֵף בְּמִיתַת הַגּוּף נוֹחַ לָאָדָם שֶׁהוּא מִתְיַסֵּר בְּיִסּוּרִין קָשִׁים שֶׁיָּמוּת בְּיִסּוּרִין לִשְׁעָתוֹ יוֹתֵר מִשֶּׁיִּחְיֶה יָמִים רַבִּים
Even in the death of the body, it is easier for a person who is tormented by severe pains to die in those pains at that moment than to live many days.

וְלֹא יְהֵא סוֹף וְקֵץ לְיִסּוּרָיו וְצַעֲרוֹ כָּךְ אוֹמֵר בַּיְּרוּשַׁלְמִי בְּמַסֶּכֶת פֵּאָה (א א) רֻבּוֹ זְכֻיּוֹת יוֹרֵשׁ
And there will be no end or limit to his suffering and pain; so says the Jerusalem Talmud in Tractate Peah (1:1): "He inherits mostly merits."

גַּן עֵדֶן רֻבּוֹ עֲוֹנוֹת יוֹרֵשׁ גֵּיהִנֹּם הָיָה מְעֻיָּן אָמַר רַבִּי יוֹסֵי בֶּן רַבִּי חֲנִינָא "נוֹשֵׂא עֲוֹנוֹת"
"The Garden of Eden, most of it inherits sins; Gehenna was desired. Rabbi Yosei ben Rabbi Hanina said, 'bearer of sins.'"

אֵין כָּתִיב כָּאן אֶלָּא "נוֹשֵׂא עָוֹן" הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא חוֹטֵף שְׁטָר אֶחָד מִן הָעֲבֵרוֹת וְהַזְּכִיּוֹת מַכְרִיעוֹת וְכוּ'
There is not written here but "bearer of sin"; the Holy One blessed be He snatches one bill from the transgressions and the merits outweigh, etc.

וְכָבָר נִזְכַּר לְמַעְלָה הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה.
And this matter has already been mentioned above.

הָעֹנֶשׁ הַזֶּה שֶׁלְגֵיהִנּוֹם מִיָּד הוּא בָּא לָאָדָם לְאַחַר מִיתָה תֶּכֶף שֶׁהָרָשָׁע מֵת נַפְשׁוֹ מִתְקַשֶּׁרֶת בְּגַלְגַּל הָאֵשׁ
This punishment of Gehenna immediately comes to a person after death, as soon as the wicked dies, his soul is bound in the wheel of fire.

וּמִשָּׁם נִצְמַדְתָּ לַנָּהָר שֶׁל-אֵשׁ הַיּוֹצֵא מִתַּחַת כִּסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד שֶׁהוּא מִיְּסוֹד הַגַּלְגַּל וְכֹחַ הָאֵשׁוֹת כֻּלָּן וְהוּא יוֹרֵד
And from there you were attached to the river of fire that emerges from beneath the throne of glory, which is from the foundation of the wheel and the power of all the fires, and it descends.

לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְעִמּוֹ מִתְגַּלְגֶּלֶת וְיוֹרֶדֶת לְשָׁם וְזֶה הָעִנְיָן דּוֹמֶה לְגִלְגּוּלֵי הַסִּבּוֹת הַחוֹזְרוֹת לְהִוָּיָתָם בְּכׇל הַנִּבְרָאִים וְהוּא נָכוֹן
To Gehenna and with it she rolls and descends there, and this matter is similar to the cycles of causes that return to their existence in all created beings, and it is correct.

וּמִתְקַבֵּל אֲפִלּוּ לִבְעָלֵי הָעִיּוּן הַפִילוֹסוֹפִי הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַזּוֹ הַחוֹזֶרֶת לְיִסוֹד הָאֵשׁ וְנִצְמֶדֶת לוֹ בֵּין בַּתְּחִלָּה בֵּין בַּסּוֹף
And it is accepted even by the owners of philosophical contemplation, this soul that returns to the element of fire and is attached to it, whether at the beginning or at the end.

נִמְשַׁכַּת בְּדַעַת לְהִתְעַלּוֹת וּלְהִדָּבֵק בָּעֶלְיוֹנִים כִּשְׁאַר כׇּל הַדְּבָרִים שֶׁתּוֹלַדְתָּן לָשׁוּב לְיִסוֹדָן וְעֹבִי הָעֲוֹנוֹת וּגְסוּת הַחֲטָאִים שֶׁהִבְדִּילוּ
Drawn in thought to ascend and cling to the upper realms, like all other things whose nature is to return to their source, and the thickness of sins and the coarseness of transgressions that have separated.

בִּינָה לְבֵין בּוֹרְאָה מוֹנְעִים אוֹתָהּ וְנִמְשֶׁכֶת וְנִצְמֶדֶת בְּאֵשׁ שֶׁל גֵּיהִנּוֹם וּמַחְשָׁבָה זוֹ הַנִּמְנַעַת מִמֶּנָּה הִיא יִסּוּרִין וְצַעַר
The understanding between her and her Creator prevents her, and she is drawn and attached to the fire of Gehenna, and this thought that is prevented from her is suffering and pain.

גָּדוֹל שֶׁאֵין לוֹ חֵקֶר וְתַכְלִית מִלְּבַד צַעַר גֵּיהִנּוֹם וְזֶה מֵעִנְיַן הַכֶּרֶת לֹמַר שֶׁהִיא נִכְרְתָה מִיְּסוֹדָהּ כְּעָנָף
Great that has no investigation and end except the pain of Gehenna, and this is from the matter of the cutting off to say that it was cut off from its foundation like a branch.

הַנִּכְרָת מִן הָאִילָן שֶׁהוּא חַי מִמֶּנּוּ כָּךְ אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (שַׁבָּת קנב ב') וְשֶׁלָּרְשָׁעִים זוֹמְמוֹת
The branch cut from the tree that is alive from it, so the Sages said, may their memory be blessed (Shabbat 152b), and the wicked plot.

וְהוֹלְכוֹת שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְאֶת נֶפֶשׁ אוֹיְבָךְ יַקְלַעֲנָה בְּתוֹךְ כַּף הַקֶּלַע" וּפֵרוּשׁ "זוֹמְמוֹת" מִלְּשׁוֹן "אֲשֶׁר יָזְמוּ לַעֲשׂוֹת" (בְּרֵאשִׁית יא)
And they go, as it is said, "And the soul of your enemy shall be cast into the midst of the sling," and the meaning of "conspiring" is from the language of "who plotted to do" (Genesis 11).

וְהָעִנְיָן כְּמוֹ שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ.
And the matter is like what we have explained.

וּמִנַּיִן לָנוּ שֶׁהוּא בָּא מִיָּד לְאַחַר מִיתָה וְאֵינוֹ מִן הַדִּינִין הָעֲתִידִין לִהְיוֹת לִימֵי הַמָּשִׁיחַ וְהָעוֹלָמוֹת הַבָּאִים
From where do we know that it comes immediately after death and is not from the judgments that are to come for the days of the Messiah and the worlds to come.

לְדַעְתֵּנוּ וְקַבָּלָתֵנוּ כָּךְ אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים בְּמַסֶּכֶת עֵדֻיּוֹת (ב י) מִשְׁפַּט רְשָׁעִים בְּגֵיהִנּוֹם שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר
According to our opinion and acceptance, so the Sages said in the tractate of Testimonies (b y) that the judgment of the wicked in Gehenna is twelve months, as it is said.

וְהָיָה מִדֵּי חֹדֶשׁ בְּחׇדְשׁוֹ וְגוֹ' וְאָמְרוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת קִדּוּשִׁין (ל"א ב') מְכַבְּדוֹ בְּחַיָּיו מְכַבְּדוֹ בְּמוֹתוֹ וְאוֹמֵר 'כָּךְ'.
And it will be from each new month, and so on. And they said in the tractate of Kiddushin (31b) that he honors him in his life and honors him in his death and says 'thus'.

אָמַר אַבָּא מָרִי הֲרֵינִי כַּפָּרַת מִשְׁכָּבוֹ" וְהָנֵי מִלֵּי בְּתוֹךְ שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ אֲבָל לְאַחַר שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר
Abba Mari said: "I am the atonement for his bed," and these words apply within twelve months, but after twelve months.

חָדָשׁ אוֹמֵר "זִכְרוּ לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" וְאָמְרוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת תַּעֲנִית (י"א א') בִּשְׁעַת פְּטִירָתוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם כׇּל מַעֲשָׂיו
A new one says "Remember for the life of the world to come" and they said in the tractate of Taanit (11a) at the time of his death that a man's all deeds.

נִפְרָטִין לְפָנָיו וְלֹא עוֹד אֶלָּא שֶׁמַּצְדִּיק עָלָיו אֶת הַדִּין וְאוֹמֵר יָפֶה דָּנְתָנִי וְכוּ' וְהִזְכִּירוֹ בַּהַגָּדָה (בָּבָא)
We are detailed before him, and not only that, but he justifies the judgment upon him and says 'You have judged me well' etc., and he mentioned it in the Haggadah (Baba).

בַּתְרָא עַד א') בְּעִנְיַן עֲדַת קֹרַח כֹּל תְּלָתִין יוֹמִין מְהַדְּרִי לְהוּ בְּגֵיהִנֹּם כְּבָשָׂר בְּקַלַּחַת וְאָמְרִי מֹשֶׁה
In the later [section] up to A) concerning the congregation of Korach, for all thirty days they return them in Gehenna like meat in a pot, and they say Moses.

אמת ותורתו אמת והן בדאין ובעניין אלישע בן אבויה אמרו (חגיגה טו ב') כי נח נפשיה


אמרי לא מידן לידייניה ולא לעלמא דאתי ליתי לא מידן לידייניה משום דגריס באורייתא ולא לעלמא


דְאָתָא לִיתִי מִשּׁוּם דְחָטָא אָמַר רַבִּי מֵאִיר מָתַי אָמוּת וְאַעֲלֶה עָשָׁן מִקִּבְרוֹ כִּי נָח נַפְשֵׁיהּ דְּרַבִּי
When he came to me because he sinned, Rabbi Meir said, "When will I die and raise smoke from his grave when his soul rests?"

מֵאִיר סָלִיק קוּטְרָא מִקַּבְרֵיהּ דְּאַחַר וּמַעֲשֶׂה נִסִּים הֲוָה כְּדֵי לְהַרְאוֹת כֵּן וְכָךְ אָמְרוּ עָלָה בַּיְּרוּשַׁלְמִי (חֲגִיגָה)
Meir ascended smoke from the grave of the other, and a miracle happened in order to show this, and so they said it was in the Jerusalem Talmud (Chagiga).

ב א) מִן דְּקָבְרוּנִיהָ יָרְדָה אֵשׁ מִן הַשָּׁמַיִם וְשָׂרְפָה קִבְרוֹ וּבְמִדְרָשׁ תְּהִלִּים אָמַר דָּוִד "בְּיָדְךָ אַפְקִיד רוּחִי"
From where they buried her, fire descended from heaven and burned his grave, and in the Midrash of Psalms David said, "In your hand I commit my spirit."

בִּשְׁעַת מִיתָתִי פָּדִיתָ אוֹתִי ה' מִן גֵּיהִנָּם וּמְפֹרָשׁ בַּהַגָּדָה (פְּסִיקְתִּי רַבָּתִי כג) בְּכׇל עֶרֶב שַׁבָּת דּוֹמֶה
At the time of my death, the Lord saved me from Gehenna, and it is written in the Haggadah (Passiketi Rabbati 23) that every Friday night is similar.

שַׂר הַמְּמֻנֶּה עַל הַנְּפָשׁוֹת מַכְרִיז וְאוֹמֵר הַנַּח לָהֶן לָרְשָׁעִים אֵלּוּ וְיִנָּחוּ וּמַנִּיחִין אוֹתָן כׇּל הַשַּׁבָּת כֻּלָּהּ.
The ruler who is in charge of the souls declares and says: "Leave these wicked ones alone and let them rest," and they leave them alone all the Sabbath.

וּבְמוֹצָאֵי שַׁבָּת עִם חֲשִׁיכָה צוֹעֵק הַמַּלְאָךְ הַמְּמֻנֶּה עַל הָרוּחוֹת חֲזָרוּ לָכֶם רְשָׁעִים לְגֵיהִנּוֹם שֶׁכְּבָר הִשְׁלִימוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל
And on Saturday night, with darkness, the angel in charge of the spirits cries out: "Return to you, wicked ones, to Gehenna, for Israel have already completed (their task)."

סִדְרֵיהֶן וּלְכָךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל מַזְכִּירִין בְּסֵדֶר מוֹצָאֵי שַׁבָּת וְאוֹמְרִין "וַיְהִי נֹעַם ה' אֱלֹהֵינוּ עָלֵינוּ" וְגוֹ' הָא לָמַדְנוּ
Their order, and for this reason Israel mentions in the order of the Sabbath evening and says, "May the pleasantness of the Lord our God be upon us" etc. We have learned from this.

מִדִּבְרֵיהֶם שֶׁהָרְשָׁעִים מִיָּד נִשְׁמָתָן וְנַפְשׁוֹתֵיהֶן נִדּוֹנוֹת בְּגֵיהִנּוֹם כְּפִי הָרָאוּי לָהֶם וּכְפִי מָה שֶׁנִּתְבָּאֵר לְמַעְלָה מִפֵּרוּשֵׁי הָעֹנֶשׁ
From their words that the wicked are immediately judged in Gehenna according to what is appropriate for them and according to what was explained above from the interpretations of the punishment.

הַהוּא וְהַדִּין הַהוּא וְזֹאת אֱמוּנַת כׇּל מַחְזִיק בִּדְבָרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה אוֹ מַאֲמִין בְּקַבָּלָתָם וְעִם מָה
That one and that law, and this is the faith of every holder of the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed, or one who believes in their acceptance, and with what?

שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ לֹא יַרְחִיקוּ דִּבְרֵיהֶם אֶחָד מִבַּעֲלֵי הָעִיּוּן אֶלָּא הַמִּשְׁתַּבֵּשׁ מֵהֶם אוֹ הַמִּתְפַּקֵּר.
Our interpretation will not distance their words from one of the intellectuals, except for the one who is confused or the one who is a heretic.

הַכֶּרֶת הַזֶּה שֶׁאָמַרְנוּ שֶׁהוּא אַבְדָּן הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֵינוֹ בְּכֹל מְחֻיָּבֵי כְּרִיתוֹת שֶׁהַצַּדִּיק הַגָּמוּר שֶׁתָּקְפוֹ יִצְרוֹ אָכַל כְּזַיִת
The knowledge of this that we said, which is the loss of the soul, is not in all those who are liable for karet, that the completely righteous one who his desire overcame him ate a piece of meat (the size of a kezayit).

מִן הַחֲלָב אֵינוֹ נִכְרָת וְאָבַד מִן הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וַאֲפִלּוּ בַּעַל אַחַת מֵחַיְּבֵי כְּרִיתוֹת אֵינוֹ אָבַד לְגַמְרֵי
From the milk he is not cut off and lost from the world to come, and even the owner of one of those liable for karet is not completely lost.

מִגַּן עֵדֶן וּמֵהָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהֲרֵי מָנוּ חֲכָמִים בְּמִשְׁנָתֵנוּ (סַנְהֶדְרִין צ' א') וְאֵלּוּ שֶׁאֵין לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם
From the Garden of Eden and from the World to Come, for the Sages enumerated in our Mishnah (Sanhedrin 90a) those who have no portion in the World to Come.

הַבָּא לֹא מָנוּ אֶלָּא הַכּוֹפְרִים בְּעִקָּרֵי הַתּוֹרָה אֶלָּא כָּךְ הוּא בִּיאוּר הָעִנְיָן שֶׁהַכֶּרֶת הַמְּפֹרָשׁ בַּתּוֹרָה עֹנֶשׁ
The one who comes does not count except the deniers of the fundamentals of the Torah, but this is the explanation of the matter that the explicit punishment in the Torah is a punishment.

מְכֻפָּל הוּא לַגּוּף וּלְנֶפֶשׁ מִי שֶׁזְּכִיּוֹתָיו מְרֻבִּין עַל עֲוֹנוֹתָיו אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁיֵּשׁ בָּהֶם מְחַיְּבֵי כָּרֵת
He is doubly punished in body and soul, one whose merits outweigh his sins, even though there are among them those that incur the penalty of karet.

הָעֹנֶשׁ מַגִּיעַ לוֹ בְּגוּפוֹ וְהוּא מֵת בַּחֲצִי יָמָיו כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ בְּמַשְׁקִין (מוֹעֵד קָטָן כ"ח א') מֵת
The punishment reaches him in his body and he dies in the middle of his days, as they said in the tractate of liquids (Moed Katan 28a) he died.

בֶּן חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה זוֹ הִיא מִיתַת כָּרֵת וְאָמְרוּ בַּסִּפְרֵי (חֻקַּת קכה) מִפְּנֵי מָה עָנַשׁ לְהַלָּן מִיתָה
A man of fifty years, this is the death of karet, and they said in the Sifrei (Chukat 125) why was he punished with death there?

וְכָאן כָּרֵת לְלַמֶּדְךָ שֶׁכָּרֵת הִיא מִיתָה וּמִיתָה הִיא כָּרֵת וּלְזֶה רוֹמֵז בַּתּוֹרָה בְּמִקְצָת הַכְּרִיתוֹת שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בָּהֶם
And here, 'karet' is taught to you that 'karet' is death and death is 'karet', and this is hinted at in the Torah in some of the 'karet' punishments that are mentioned.

"וְנִכְרַת הָאִישׁ הַהוּא מֵעַמָּיו" לְאַחַר שֶׁמֵּת זֶה הַמְּחֻיָּב כָּרֵת בְּגוּפוֹ כֵּיוָן שֶׁרֻבּוֹ זְכֻיּוֹת אֵינוֹ יוֹרֵד לְגֵיהִנֹּם
"And that man is cut off from his people" after he dies, this one who is obligated to be cut off in his body, because most of his deeds are merits, he does not descend to Gehenna.

אֶלָּא זוֹכֶה לְמַעְלָה הָרְאוּיָה לוֹ מֵחֶלְקֵי גַּן עֵדֶן וְיֵשׁ בְּמַחְוִיבֵי כָּרֵת מִי שֶׁעֲוֹנוֹתָיו מְרֻבִּין מִזְּכִיּוֹתָיו וְעֹנֶשׁ
But he gains a higher level in the portions of the Garden of Eden, and among those liable for karet there are those whose sins outweigh their merits, and punishment.

כָּרֵת שֶׁלּוֹ מַגִּיעַ לְנֶפֶשׁ הַחוֹטֵאת לְאַחַר שֶׁתִּפָּרֵד מִן הַגּוּף שֶׁהִיא נִכְרֶתֶת מֵחַיֵּי גַּן עֵדֶן וְהֵם הָרְשָׁעִים
His karet reaches the sinful soul after it separates from the body that it is cut off from the life of the Garden of Eden, and they are the wicked.

שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ שֶׁעֲוֹנוֹתֵיהֶן מְרֻבִּין וְיֵשׁ בִּכְלָלָן עָוֹן פּוֹשְׁעֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּגוּפָן שֶׁשָּׁנוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (רֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה יז )
that we mentioned that their sins are numerous and among them is the sin of the transgressors of Israel in their bodies, which the sages, may their memory be blessed, taught (Rosh Hashanah 17).

שֶׁיּוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְנִדּוֹנִין בָּהּ י"ב חֹדֶשׁ לְאַחַר י"ב חֹדֶשׁ גּוּפָן כָּלָה וְנִשְׁמָתָן נִשְׂרֶפֶת וְרוּחַ מְפַזֶּרֶתָן תַּחַת
Those who descend to Gehenna and are judged there for twelve months; after twelve months their bodies are destroyed and their souls are burned, and a wind scatters them.

כפות רגלי הצדיקים ומחוייבי כריתות הללו הם שרמז הכתוב "ונכרתה הנפש ההיא מלפני" וכתיב "והאבדתי את


הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא" רְשָׁעִים הַלָּלוּ אֵין לָהֶם כָּרֵת בְּגוּפָן אֶלָּא פְּעָמִים שֶׁמְּזַקְּנִים בְּשַׁלְוָה בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּדִכְתִיב (קֹהֶלֶת ז')
"That soul, these wicked ones have no karet in their bodies, but sometimes they age in peace in this world as it is written (Ecclesiastes 7)."

"יֵשׁ רָשָׁע מַאֲרִיךְ בְּרַעָתוֹ" וּכְפִי מָה שֶׁכָּתַבְנוּ לְמַעְלָה וְיֵשׁ עוֹד בְּמַחְוִיבֵי כָּרֵת שֶׁגּוּפוֹ נִכְרָת מֵחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם
"There is a wicked man who prolongs his evil," and as we wrote above, and there are also among those liable for karet whose body is cut off from the life of the world.

הַזֶּה וְנַפְשׁוֹ נִכְרֶתֶת מֵחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאֵין צָרִיךְ לוֹמַר מֵחַיֵּי גַּן עֵדֶן לְפִי שֶׁהוּא נִדּוֹן בְּגֵיהִנָּם
This one, and his soul is cut off from the life of the world to come, and there is no need to say from the life of the Garden of Eden, because he is judged in Gehenna.

לְעוֹלָם וְהֵם עוֹבְדֵי עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה שֶׁמָּנוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה בַּמִּשְׁנָה וְאֵלּוּ הֵם שֶׁאֵין לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם
For eternity, and they are idol worshippers, whom the sages, may their memory be blessed, enumerated in the Mishnah, and these are those who have no portion in the world to come.

הַבָּא הָאוֹמֵר אֵין תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים מִן הַתּוֹרָה וְאֵין תּוֹרָה מִן הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאַפִּיקוֹרֹס וּמָה שֶׁהוֹסִיפוּ עֲלֵיהֶן בַּבְּרִיְּתָא
He who says that there is no resurrection of the dead from the Torah, and that there is no Torah from heaven, and is an apostate, and what they added to them in the baraita.

דְּקָתָנִי בַּתּוֹסֶפְתָּא (סַנְהֶדְרִין י"ב ט)
that it teaches in the Tosefta (Sanhedrin 12:9)

הוֹסִיפוּ עֲלֵיהֶן הַפּוֹרֵק עוֹל וְהַמְּפַר בְּרִית בָּשָׂר וְהַמְּגַלֶּה פָּנִים בַּתּוֹרָה וְהָנֵי דְּקָתָנֵי אִידָךְ בְּרַיְתָא הָתָם הַמִּינִים
They added to them the one who removes the yoke and the one who breaks the covenant of flesh and the one who reveals his face in the Torah and those that are taught in another baraita there, the heretics.

וְהָאַפִּיקוֹרְסִין וְהַמְּשֻׁמָּדִים וְהַמְּסוֹרוֹת וְשֶׁפָּרְשׁוּ מִדַּרְכֵי צִבּוּר וְשֶׁחָטְאוּ וְשֶׁהֶחְטִיאוּ אֶת הָרַבִּים וְשֶׁנָּתְנוּ חֲתִיתָם בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים יוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנֹּם
And the apostates and the converts and the informers and those who have separated from the ways of the community and those who have sinned and those who have caused others to sin and those who have given their lives in the land of life descend into Gehenna.

וְנִדּוֹנִין בָּהּ לְדוֹרֵי דוֹרוֹת וְכוּ' וְרָשָׁעִים הַלָּלוּ הֵם שֶׁכָּתוּב בָּהֶם "הֲכֵרֹת תִּכָּרֵת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא עֲוֹנָה בָּהּ"
and they are judged in it for generations and generations, etc., and these wicked ones are those about whom it is written "the soul that sins shall die."

וְדָרְשׁוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (סִפְרֵי שְׁלַח קיב) "הֲכֵרַת" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "תִּכָּרֵת" לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כֶּפֶל זֶה לֹא
And our sages, may their memory be blessed, expounded (Sifrei Shelach 102) that 'the recognition' in this world 'will be cut off' in the world to come; this double meaning is not.

נֶאֱמַר בַּתּוֹרָה אֶלָּא לְעִנְיַן עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה וּמְגַדֵּף וְכַיּוֹצֵא בָּהֶם דִּכְתִיב "כִּי דָּבָר ה' בָּזֶה וְאֶת מִצְוָתוֹ"
It is said in the Torah, except for the matter of idolatry and blasphemy and the like, that "He who despises the word of the Lord and His commandment".

הֶפֶר הַכֶּרֶת תִּכָּרֵת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא עוֹנָה בָּהּ וְדָרְשׁוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת שְׁבוּעוֹת (י"ג א') "כִּי דָּבָר ה' בָּזֶה".
If one violates the oath, that soul will be cut off, and they interpreted in the tractate of Shavuot (13a) "because he has despised the word of the Lord."

זֶה הַפּוֹרֵק עוֹל וּמְגַלֶּה פָּנִים בַּתּוֹרָה "וְאֶת מִצְוָתוֹ הֵפֵר" זֶה הַמֵּפֵר בְּרִית בָּשָׂר וְשָׁם אָמְרוּ בַּבֵּאוּר
This is the one who removes the yoke and reveals his face in the Torah, "and he broke his commandment." This is the one who breaks the covenant of flesh, and there they said in the explanation.

שֶׁאֵין כֶּפֶל כָּרֵת זֶה נִדְרָשׁ בְּכׇל עֲבֵרוֹת שֶׁבַּתּוֹרָה אֶלָּא בְּאֵלּוּ שֶׁבַּכְּתוּב הַזֶּה וּלְפִיכָךְ לֹא מָנוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ
that this double death penalty is not required for all transgressions in the Torah, but only for those in this written passage, and therefore our Sages did not enumerate them.

זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה אֶלָּא אֵלּוּ הַנִּזְכָּרִים וְכַיּוֹצֵא בָּהֶם לְפִי שֶׁהַכָּתוּב הַזֶּה בְּעִנְיַן עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה נֶאֱמַר וְרִבָּה הַכָּתוּב
Their memory be blessed, but rather these who are mentioned and those like them, because this scripture concerning idolatry is said and the scripture multiplies.

אֵת אֵלּוּ וְהוּא הַדִּין לְכׇל הַכּוֹפְרִים בָּעִקָּר וְכֵן בִּשְׁאַר הָרְשָׁעִים הַמֻּחְלָטִין לְפִי שֶׁמָּצְאוּ בָּהֶן בַּקַּבָּלָה "כִּי"
These and the same applies to all those who deny the principle, and likewise to the other absolute evildoers, because they found in them in the Kabbalah "that".

תּוֹלַעְתָּם לֹא תָּמוּת וְאֵשָׁם לֹא תִּכְבֶּה" הָא בִּשְׁאַר הַכְּרִיתוֹת אֵינוֹ כֵּן אֶלָּא כְּמוֹ שֶׁבֵּאַרְנוּ.
"Their worm will not die and their fire will not be extinguished" but in the other punishments it is not so, but as we have explained.

אֶף עַל פִּי שֶׁיֵּשׁ בַּחֲטָאִים אֵלּוּ כָּרֵת בַּגּוּף בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְכָרֵת בַּנֶּפֶשׁ לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא יֵשׁ כּוֹפֵר
Even though there is in these sins a karet (excommunication) in the body in this world and a karet in the soul in the world to come, there is a redeemer.

בָּעִקָּר שֶׁמַּאֲרִיכִין לוֹ וְאוֹכֵל חַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְאִם תֹּאמַר וְהֵיאַךְ תּוֹלִין לוֹ עַל כָּרֵת שֶׁבְּגוּפוֹ אִם
In the main, that they lengthen him and he eats the life of this world, and if you say, and how do they hang it on him for the death penalty that is in his body, if ...

בִּשְׁבִיל זְכוּת שֶׁעָשָׂה אֵין לַכּוֹפֵר בָּעִקָּר זְכוּת לְפִי שֶׁהוּא עוֹשֶׂה לְשֵׁם כַּפַּרְנָתוֹ וְלֹא לִשְׁמוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא
Because of the merit he has earned, the penitent does not have the primary merit, because he does it for the sake of his atonement and not for the sake of the Holy One, blessed be He.

הוּא יִתְבָּרֵךְ זוֹ אֵינָהּ קוּשְׁיָא שֶׁיֵּשׁ בְּדַרְכָיו שֶׁל בַּעַל הָרַחֲמִים לְרַחֵם עַל מִי שֶׁעוֹשֶׂה טוֹבָה וּמַעֲשֶׂה
He, may He be blessed, this is not a difficulty that there is in the ways of the Master of Mercy to have mercy on one who does a good deed and an action.

הָגּוּן בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה אֲפִלּוּ עָשָׂאוּ לְשֵׁם עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה כְּגוֹן מָה שֶׁאָמַרְנוּ בְּאוּמוֹת הָעוֹלָם וְכֵן בִּדְבָרֵי הַנְּבִיאִים
A person who is upright in this world, even if he made it for the sake of idolatry, such as what we said about the nations of the world, and likewise in the words of the prophets.

מִקְצָת אֻמּוֹת שֶׁנִּגְזַר עֲלֵיהֶם גָּלוּת בִּשְׁבִיל מָה שֶׁהִרְעוּ לְיִשְׂרָאֵל וּשְׁאַר אֻמּוֹת לֹא הִרְעוּ לָהֶם לֹא נִגְזַר
Some nations were exiled because of what they did to Israel, while other nations that did not harm them were not exiled.

עֲלֵיהֶם גָּלוּת וְכֵן הַכָּתוּב מַזְהִירֵנוּ "לֹא תְּתַעֵב אֱדוֹמִי כִּי אָחִיךָ הוּא" וְכָל שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁכְּבָר רָמַזְנוּ [סוֹד]
They are exiled, and so the Scripture warns us, "Do not abhor an Edomite because he is your brother," and all the more so, we have already hinted [a secret].

שֶׁיֵּשׁ בּוֹ תִּקּוּן כׇּל הַשְּׁאֵלוֹת הַלָּלוּ שֶׁהַדִּין נוֹתֵן לְהִתְלוֹת אֲפִלּוּ לְעוֹבֵד עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה לְהַכְעִיס בָּרוּךְ שׁוֹפֵט
that there is in it a correction of all these questions that the law gives to be hanged even for a worshipper of idolatry to anger the blessed judge.

הַצֶּדֶק שֶׁיָּסַד הַכֹּל בְּרַחֲמִים.
The justice that founded everything with mercy.

וְאַחֲרֵי שֶׁבֵּאַרְנוּ אֱמוּנָתָם וּדְבָרֵיהֶם צְרִיכִין אָנוּ לָחוּשׁ וּלְפָרֵשׁ דִּבְרֵי הָרַב הַגָּדוֹל רַבִּי מֹשֶׁה בַּר מַיְמוֹן כָּתַב
And after we have explained their belief and their words, we must be careful and interpret the words of the great rabbi Rabbi Moses ben Maimon wrote.

בְּסֵפֶר הַמַּדָּע (תְּשׁוּבָה ח א) שְׂכַר הַצַּדִּיקִים הוּא שֶׁיִּזְכּוּ לְנֹעַם זֶה וּפִרְעוֹן מִן הָרְשָׁעִים שֶׁלֹּא יִזְכּוּ
In the Book of Knowledge (Response 8:1) the reward of the righteous is that they will merit this pleasantness and retribution from the wicked who will not merit it.

לְחַיִּים אֶלָּא יִכָּרְתוּ וְיָמוּתוּ וְכֹל מִי שֶׁאֵינוֹ זוֹכֶה לְחַיִּים אֵלּוּ הוּא הַמֵּת שֶׁאֵינוֹ חַי לְעוֹלָם אֶלָּא
For life, but rather they will be cut off and die, and everyone who does not merit these lives is the dead one who is not alive forever, but rather.

נִכְרַת בְּרִשְׁעֹו וְאָבַד זֶהוּ הַכָּרֵת שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "הַכָּרֵת תִּכָּרֵת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא עֲוֹנָה בָּהּ" מִפִּי הַשְּׁמוּעָה לָמַדְנוּ "הַכָּרֵת".
He is cut off in his wickedness and lost; this is the "cutting off" that is said: "The soul shall be cut off for its sin." We learned from the oral tradition that "cutting off" means...

בְּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "תִּכָּרֵת" לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁאוֹתָהּ הַנֶּפֶשׁ שֶׁפִּרְשָׁה מִן הַגּוּף בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה אֵינָה זוֹכָה לְחַיֵּי
In this world, "you will be cut off" to the next world, that is, that same soul that departed from the body in this world does not merit eternal life.

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֶלָּא גַּם כֵּן נִכְרְתָה מִן הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא עוֹד כָּתַב הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה שֶׁהַנָּקָמָה שֶׁאֵין
the world to come, but also cut off from the world to come. The rabbi, may his memory be blessed, also wrote that the vengeance that does not...

נְקָמָה לְמַעְלָה מִמֶּנָּה שֶׁתִּכָּרֵת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא שֶׁעוֹנָה בָּהּ וְזֶה הָאַבְדָּן הוּא שֶׁקּוֹרִין אוֹתוֹ הַנְּבִיאִים דֶּרֶךְ מָשָׁל
A revenge greater than her, that the soul that sins in her will be cut off, and this loss is what the prophets call it in a parable.

בְּאֵר שַׁחַת "אַבְדָן" וְתַפְתֵּה וְעֲלוּקָה וְכׇל לְשׁוֹן כְּלִיָּה וְהַשְׁחָתָה לְפִי שֶׁהוּא הַכְּלִיָּה שֶׁאֵין אַחֲרֶיהָ תְּקוּמָה וְהַהֶפְסֵד
Pit of destruction, loss, seduction, leech, and all language of destruction and ruin because it is the destruction that has no recovery after it and the loss.

שֶׁאֵינוֹ חוֹזֵר לְעוֹלָם כׇּל אֵלּוּ דִּבְרֵי הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה.
that does not return to the world all these words of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed.

מִי שֶׁרוֹאֶה דְּבָרִים אֵלּוּ לִבּוֹ נוֹקְפוֹ שֶׁמָּא נָטְתָה דַּעַת הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה לוֹמַר שֶׁאֵין עֹנֶשׁ וְיִסּוּרִין
Whoever sees these things his heart is struck, perhaps the opinion of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, is that there is no punishment and suffering.

לְנֶפֶשׁ הַחוֹטֵאת וְלֹא תַּשִּׂיג אוֹתָהּ צַעַר כְּדֶרֶךְ הַחִיצוֹנִים חַס וְשָׁלוֹם אֶלָּא דִּבְרֵי הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה עַל
For the soul of the sinner, and it will not reach her sorrow as the way of the external ones, God forbid, but rather the words of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, about.

סוֹף הָאֲבֵדָן וְהַכְּלִיּוֹן הַחָרוּץ שֶׁאֵין אַחֲרָיו עֹנֶשׁ וּנְקָמָה וְהוּא הַכֶּרֶת שֶׁהוּא בִּטּוּל הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְכָלַל בָּהּ שֶׁהַבִּטּוּל
The end of loss and resolute destruction, which has no punishment or revenge after it, and it is the annihilation that is the nullification of the soul, and he included in it that the nullification.

הַזֶּה מִלְּבַד מָה שֶׁנִּתְיַסְּרָה תְּחִלָּה בְּעִנְשֵׁי גֵּיהִנּוֹם וְיִסּוּרִין שֶׁבּוֹ הוּא עֹנֶשׁ גָּדוֹל וְאַבֵּדָן חָמוּר לְפִי שֶׁאָבְדָה
This, in addition to what she was initially afflicted with in the punishments of Gehenna and the torments therein, is a great punishment and a severe loss, because she was lost.

הַנֹּעַם הַגָּדוֹל שֶׁהָיְתָה רְאוּיָה לוֹ מִצַּד שֶׁהִיא בְּרִיָּה זַכָּה שֶׁלֻּקְּחָה מִמְּקוֹם הַכָּבוֹד כַּמַּלְאָכִים אוֹ לְמַעְלָה מֵהֶן
The great beauty that was due to him from the side that she is a pure creature taken from the place of honor like angels or above them.

וְהוּא זְכוּת הַצַּדִּיקִים וּמַעֲלָתָם שֶׁהֵם זוֹכִים לָהּ כְּמוֹ שֶׁפֵּרֵשׁ הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה וּכְמוֹ שֶׁאָנוּ עֲתִידִים לְבָאֵר
And it is the merit of the righteous and their elevation that they merit, as the rabbi explained, may his memory be blessed, and as we are destined to explain.

וְאַף עַל פִּי שֶׁלֹּא פֵּרֵשׁ הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה כׇּל צׇרְכוֹ בְּבִטּוּל הַזֶּה שֶׁיִּהְיֶה מִתּוֹךְ דִּין וְיִסּוּרִין
And even though the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, did not fully explain his need in this nullification that it should be from within judgment and suffering.

יֵשׁ רְאָיָה לְלַמֵּד עָלָיו זְכוּת שֶׁהֲרֵי כָּתַב בְּפֶרֶק אֶחָד מִפִּרְקֵי הַסֵּפֶר הַנִּזְכָּר (תְּשׁוּבָה ג ה ו)
There is evidence to learn in his favor, for he wrote in one chapter of the mentioned book's sections (Response 3, 5, 6).

כֹּל הָרְשָׁעִים שֶׁעֲוֹנוֹתֵיהֶן מְרֻבִּין דָּנִין אוֹתָם כְּפִי חֲטָאֵיהֶן וְיֵשׁ לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁכֹּל יִשְׂרָאֵל יֵשׁ
All the wicked whose sins are many are judged according to their sins, and they have a share in the World to Come, because all of Israel have a share.

לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאֵלּוּ שֶׁאֵין לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא נִדּוֹנִין וְנִכְרָתִין וְאוֹבְדִין כְּפִי גֹּדֶל רִשְׁעָתָם
They have a share in the World to Come, and those who do not have a share in the World to Come are judged, cut off, and lost according to the magnitude of their wickedness.

וְחָטָאתֶם לְעוֹלָם וּלְעוֹלְמֵי עוֹלָמִים הַמִּינִין וְהָאַפִּיקוֹרְסִין וְהַכּוֹפְרִים בַּתּוֹרָה וְכוּ' הֲרֵי שֶׁהִפְרִישׁ בֵּין חַיָּבֵי הַכֶּרֶת הַגָּמוּר וּבֵין
And you sinned forever and for all eternity, the heretics and the apostates and those who deny the Torah, etc. Behold, he distinguished between those who are liable for the complete karet and between.

הַנִּדּוֹן כְּפִי רִשְׁעוֹ וְאִם אֵין שָׁם מָקוֹם שֶׁלְּעֹנֶשׁ וְיִסּוּרִין לַנֶּפֶשׁ מַהוּ הַמִּשְׁפָּט הַזֶּה שֶׁנִּדּוֹן בּוֹ הָרָשָׁע
The one judged according to his wickedness, and if there is no place for punishment and afflictions for the soul, what is this judgment by which the wicked one is judged?

כְּפִי רִשְׁעֵהוּ וּבְסוֹף יֵשׁ לוֹ חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הָא אֵין הַכַּוָּנָה אֶלָּא כְּמוֹ שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ.
As his wickedness, and in the end he has a share in the World to Come. Is it not that the intention is only as we have explained?

אֲבָל יֵשׁ לוֹ לָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה בְּמָקוֹם אַחֵר דְּבָרִים מְשַׁבְּשִׁים הַדֵּעוֹת חָזַר וְשָׁנָה זֶה הָעִנְיָן בְּפֵרוּשׁ
But there are other things in the memory of the rabbi, blessed be he, in another place that confuse the opinions. He returned and repeated this matter in explanation.

הַמִּשְׁנָה בְּפֶרֶק חֵלֶק וְאָמַר כִּי הָעֹנֶשׁ הַגָּדוֹל הוּא שֶׁתִּפָּסֵק הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְתֹאבֵד וְשֶׁלֹּא תִּשָּׁאֵר וְהוּא מָה שֶׁנִּזְכַּר
The Mishnah in the chapter of 'Halak' and said that the great punishment is that the soul will cease and be lost and not remain, and it is what was mentioned.

בַּתּוֹרָה בְּעִנְיַן כָּרֵת כְּמוֹ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "הַכָּרֵת תִּכָּרֵת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִיא" וְאָמְרוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה "הַכָּרֵת" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "תִּכָּרֵת"
In the Torah concerning the matter of 'karet' as it is said, "the soul shall be cut off," and they said, "karet" in this world and "cut off" in the next.

לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאָמַר הַכָּתוּב "וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדוֹנִי צְרוּרָה בְּצִרּוּר הַחַיִּים" וְכׇל מִי שֶׁיִּהְיֶה נִמְשָׁךְ אֶל הַתַּעֲנוּגִים
For the world to come and the Scripture says, "And the soul of my lord shall be bound up in the bundle of life," and everyone who will be drawn to pleasures.

הַגַּשְׁמִיִּים וְיַשְׁלִיךְ הָאֱמֶת אַחֲרֵי גּוּפוֹ וְיַגְבִּיר הַשֶּׁקֶר עַל הָאֱמֶת יִכָּרֵת וְיֹאבֵד מִן הַמַּעֲלָה הַהִיא וְיִשָּׁאֵר גּוּף
The material things will cast truth behind their back and will increase falsehood over truth; they will be cut off and will be lost from that elevation, and a body will remain.

אֹבֵד בִּלְבַד וְכָתַב וְאוּלָם גֵּיהִנּוֹם הוּא כִּנּוּי עַל עֹנֶשׁ הָרְשָׁעִים וְלֹא הִתְבַּאֵר בַּתַּלְמוּד אֵיךְ יִהְיֶה זֶה
Lost alone and wrote, but Gehenna is a nickname for the punishment of the wicked, and it was not clarified in the Talmud how this will be.

הָעֹנֶשׁ אֲבָל מִקְצָתָם אוֹמְרִים כִּי הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ תִּקְרַב אֶל הָרְשָׁעִים וְתִשְׂרְפֵם וְיָבִיאוּ רְאָיָה מִן הַפָּסוּק "הִנֵּה יוֹם"
The punishment, but some of them say that the sun will approach the wicked and burn them, and they bring proof from the verse "Behold a day".

בָּא בּוֹעֵר כְּתַנּוּר" וְגוֹ' וּמִקְצָתָם אוֹמְרִים כִּי חֲמִימוּת נִפְלָא תִּבְעַר בְּגוּפָם וְתִשְׂרְפֵם כְּדִכְתִיב "רוּחֲכֶם אֵשׁ תֹּאכַלְכֶם".
"He comes burning like an oven," etc., and some of them say that a wondrous heat will burn in their bodies and consume them, as it is written, "Your spirit is a fire that will consume you."

אֵלּוּ דְּבָרָיו זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה וְאֵינָם דְּבָרִים נוֹחִים לְדַעְתֵּנוּ מִפְּנֵי שֶׁדִּבְרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם בְּמַחְלוֹקֶת שֶׁהִזְכִּיר אֵינָם עַל
These are his words, may his memory be blessed, and they are not easy for us to understand because the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed, in the dispute that he mentioned are not upon.

דִּינֵי גֵיהִנּוֹם הַמָּצוּי תָּמִיד שֶׁהוּא לְדִבְרֵי הַכֹּל מְקוֹם דִּין בְּאֵשׁ נִפְלָאָה לִבְרָכָה דַּקָּה בָּרָא הָאֱלֹהִים לְעֹנֶשׁ
The laws of Gehenna that are always present, which is, according to everyone, a place of judgment in a wondrous fire for a fine blessing that God created for punishment.

וְלֹאֲבֵד רְחָקָיו וּלְהַצְמִית כׇּל זוֹנָה מִמֶּנּוּ אֲבָל יֵשׁ לָדַעַת רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה עוֹד יוֹם מוֹעֵד לְדִין
and to destroy his distant ones and to annihilate every harlot from him, but there is to know our sages, may their memory be blessed, another day appointed for judgment.

עַמִּים וְהוּא הַיּוֹם שֶׁהַנְּבִיאִים מְעִידִים אוֹתָנוּ "הִנֵּה יוֹם בָּא בּוֹעֵר כְּתַנּוּר" וְאָמַר מַלְאָכִי "יוֹם ה' הַגָּדוֹל וְהַנּוֹרָא"
Nations, and it is the day that the prophets testify to us, "Behold, a day is coming that will burn like an oven," and Malachi said, "The great and terrible day of the Lord."

כִּי כְּמוֹ שֶׁנִּדּוֹנִין בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה עַל חַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְנִדּוֹנִין כׇּל אָדָם בְּיוֹם מִיתָתוֹ עַל שָׂכָר
Because just as we are judged on Rosh Hashanah for the life of this world, and each person is judged on the day of his death for reward.

נַפְשׁוֹ וְעֹנֶשׁ גֵּיהִנֹּם כֵּן נִדּוֹנִין הַכֹּל בְּיוֹם הַדִּין מִתְּחִלַּת יְמוֹת הַתְּחִיָּה עַל עִנְיָן אוֹתוֹ שָׂכָר הָעֲתִיד
His soul and the punishment of Gehenna are judged in this manner; all are judged on the Day of Judgment from the beginning of the days of resurrection concerning the matter of that future reward.

לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא אִם רָאוּי לִתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וּלְנֹעַם הַגּוּף וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ בְּאוֹתוֹ זְמַן וְכֵן כָּתוּב בְּאוֹתוֹ הָעֵת "וְרַבִּים"
For the world to come, if it is worthy of the resurrection of the dead and the pleasure of the body and soul at that time, and so it is written at that time "and many".

מִיְּשֵׁנִי אַדְמַת עָפָר יָקִיצוּ אֵלֶּה לְחַיֵּי עוֹלָם וְאֵלֶּה לְחֶרְפּוֹת לְדִרְאוֹן עוֹלָם וְהֵן רְשָׁעִים כְּגוֹן אֻמּוֹת הָעוֹלָם
From the dust of the earth they will rise, these to eternal life and those to eternal disgrace, and they are wicked like the nations of the world.

וְעוֹבְרֵי עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה שֶׁיִּגְמַר דִּינָם לִדְרָאוֹן עוֹלָם וְשֶׁלֹּא יִנְעֲמוּ בַּחַיִּים הַהֵם אֶלָּא יִשָּׁאֲרוּ בַּדְּרָאוֹן שֶׁלָּהֶם אוֹ
And those who transgress idolatry, whose judgment will be to eternal perdition, and who will not enjoy life but will remain in their perdition, or.

יִכְפֹּל עֲלֵיהֶם עֹנֶשׁ מִמִּדָּה הַקָּשָׁה לְרָעָה הֵימֶנָּה כְּפִי מָה שֶׁנִּתְחַיְּבוּ וְעַל הַדִּין הַזֶּה שָׁנִינוּ בַּמִּשְׁנָה אֲנָשִׁי
He will double their punishment from a harsh measure, worse than it, according to what they were obligated, and on this law we have taught in the Mishnah, 'Anshi'.

דּוֹר הַמַּבּוּל אֵין לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאֵין עוֹמְדִין בַּדִּין וְאַנְשֵׁי סְדוֹם אֵין לָהֶם [חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא]
The generation of the flood has no share in the world to come, and they do not stand in judgment, and the people of Sodom have no share in the world to come.

אֲבָל עוֹמְדִין בַּדִּין וְכֵן בְּכׇל מָקוֹם שֶׁתִּמְצָא בְּדִבְרֵיהֶם זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה אֲרִיכוּת הָעֳנָשִׁים לָעֲתִיד הוּא מֵהַכְרָתַת הַנֶּפֶשׁ
But they stand in judgment, and likewise in every place that you find in their words, the memory of them for a blessing, the length of the punishments for the future is from the cutting off of the soul.

הַחוֹטֵאת בַּדִּין הַהוּא כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ בְּאוֹתָה שְׁמוֹת רַבָּה (ל כ) שָׁאֲלוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל לְבִלְעָם אֵימָתַי הִיא אָמַר
The sinner in that law, as they said in that Midrash Rabbah (L, 20), Israel asked Balaam when she would say.

לָהֶם "אֶרְאֶנּוּ וְלֹא עַתָּה" אָמַר לָהֶם הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא זוֹ הִיא דַּעְתְּכֶם אִי אַתֶּם יוֹדְעִין שֶׁסּוֹפוֹ
To them, "I will show him, but not now," the Holy One, blessed be He, said to them: "This is your opinion. Do you not know that his end..."

לִירֵד לְגֵיהִנּוֹם וְאֵינוֹ רוֹצֶה שֶׁתָּבוֹא יְשׁוּעָתִי וְכוּ' זֶה הָעִנְיָן לְדִין גֵּיהִנּוֹם הָעָתִיד לְיוֹם הַדִּין הַגָּדוֹל וְיוֹנָתָן
To descend into Gehenna and he does not want my salvation to come, etc. This is the matter of the judgment of Gehenna that is destined for the great Day of Judgment, and Jonathan.

בֶּן עוּזִיאֵל עָלָיו הַשָּׁלוֹם אָמַר בְּתַרְגּוּם "כִּי לֹא בְּיָד יִקְּחוּ" (שְׁמוּאֵל ב' כ"ג ו ז) בְּכֵן
Ben Uziel, peace be upon him, said in the Targum 'for they shall not take it by hand' (2 Samuel 23:6-7) in this way.

לית פורענותהון ביד אינש אלהין באישתא עתידין לאיתוקדא די ליתוקדין באתגלא בית דינא רבה למיתב על


כּוּרְסֵי דִּינָא לְמֵידָן יַת עוֹלָמָא" וְאָמְרוּ בְּמֵכִילְתָּא (בְּשֶׁלַח וַיִּסַּע ד).
"The thrones of judgment to judge the world" and they said in the Mechilta (in Shelah and he traveled d).

אִם תִּזְכּוּ לִשְׁמֹר אֶת הַשַּׁבָּת תִּנָּצְלוּ מִשָּׁלוֹשׁ פּוֹרְעָנִיּוֹת מִיּוֹם גּוֹג וּמִגּוֹג וּמֵחֶבְלוֹ שֶׁל הַמָּשִׁיחַ וּמִיּוֹם דִּין הַגָּדוֹל
If you merit to keep the Sabbath, you will be saved from three calamities: from the day of Gog and Magog, from the messiah's tribulation, and from the great day of judgment.

וְאָמְרוּ בְּיִלְמַדְנוּ (תַּנְחוּמָא יָשָׁן) וּבִמְקוֹמוֹת אֲחֵרִים בַּמִּדְרָשׁ (מִדְרָשׁ שְׁמוּאֵל א כד) "לָמָּה הִרְגַּזְתַּנִי לְהַעֲלוֹת אוֹתִי" שֶׁהָיָה
And they said in 'Yelamedenu' (Old Tanhuma) and in other places in the Midrash (Midrash Samuel A 24) 'Why did you disturb me to bring me up?' which was.

שְׁמוּאֵל מִתְיָרֵא שֶׁהִגִּיעַ יוֹם הַדִּין אַף עַל פִּי שֶׁכְּבָר מֵת זֶה כַּמָּה הָיָה סָבוּר שֶׁהוּא הַדִּין
Samuel is afraid that the Day of Judgment has arrived, even though he has already died for some time; he was under the impression that it was the judgment.

הָעֲתִיד שֶׁהַכֹּל נִדּוֹנִין בּוֹ וְעַל זֶה אָמַר רֵישׁ לָקִישׁ (עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה ג' ב') "אֵין גֵּיהִנֹּם לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא"
The future in which all are judged, and on this Reish Lakish said (Avodah Zara 3b) "There is no Gehenna in the future."

וְהוּא יוֹם הַדִּין הָעָתִיד לָבוֹא אֶלָּא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מוֹצִיא חַמָּה מִנַּרְתִּיקָה וּמְקַדֶּרָה רְשָׁעִים נִדּוֹנִין בָּהּ
And it is the Day of Judgment that is to come, but the Holy One, blessed be He, brings out the sun from its sheath and darkens it; the wicked are judged in it.

וְצַדִּיקִים מִתְרַפְּאִים הִימֶּנָּה וְהֵם הַצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁזָּכוּ לִתְחִיָּה וְעָמְדוּ בְּמוּמָם כְּמוֹ שֶׁהָלְכוּ מֵת חַגָּר אוֹ סוּמָא עוֹמֵד
And the righteous are healed by her, and they are the righteous who have merited resurrection and stand in their blemish, just as they went out dead, lame or blind, standing.

בְּמוּמוֹ שֶׁלֹּא יֹאמְרוּ "מִן הַשָּׁמַיִם רִפֵּא אוֹתָם אֵלּוּ אֲחֵרִים הֵם " וְהֵבִיאוּ רְאָיָה לָזֶה מִדִּכְתִיב "הִנֵּה"
In his defect, so that they should not say, "From the heavens He healed them; these are other ones," and they brought proof of this from the verse "Behold."

יוֹם בָּא בּוֹעֵר כְּתַנּוּר וְהָיוּ כׇּל זֵדִים וְכׇל עוֹשֵׂי רֶשַׁע קַשׁ וְלַהֵט אוֹתָם הַיּוֹם הַבָּא אָמַר ה'
A day is coming that will burn like an oven, and all the wicked and all those who do evil will be like straw and will be burned on that coming day, says the Lord.

צְבָאוֹת אֲשֶׁר לֹא יַעֲזֹב לָהֶם לֹא שֹׁרֶשׁ וְלֹא עָנָף" וְדָרְשׁוּ "לֹא שֹׁרֶשׁ" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "וְלֹא עָנָף"
"Armies for which He will not leave them without root or branch," and they interpreted "without root" in this world and "without branch" in the world to come.

לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהַצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁמִּתְרַפְּאִים בָּהּ דָּרַשׁ עוֹד רַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן לָקִישׁ דִּכְתִיב "וְזָרְחָה לָכֶם יִרְאֵי שְׁמִי"
For the world to come and the righteous who are healed in it, Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish further expounded, as it is written, "And the sun shall rise for you who fear My name."

שֶׁמֶשׁ צֶדֶקָה וּמַרְפֵּא בְּכַנְפֶיהָ" וְהִנֵּה אֵין זֶה גֵּיהִנּוֹם הַהוֹוֶה לָאָדָם אַחַר הַמָּוֶת וְכֵן פֵּרֵשׁ בִּתְחִלַּת מַסֶּכֶת
"Sun of righteousness and healing in its wings" and behold, this is not the Gehenna that comes upon man after death, and so he explained at the beginning of the tractate.

עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה (ג' ב') "וַתַּעֲשֶׂה אָדָם כְּדָגֵי הַיָּם כָּרֶמֶשׂ" מָה דָּגִים שֶׁבַּיָּם כִּיּוֹן שֶׁקָּדְדָה עֲלֵיהֶם חַמָּה
Foreign work (3b) "And she made man like the fish of the sea like the worm" what are the fish of the sea when the sun sets over them?

מִיָּד מֵתִים אַף בְּנֵי אָדָם כֵּיוָן שֶׁקָּדְדָה עֲלֵיהֶם חַמָּה מִיָּד מֵתִים וְהֶעֱמִידוּהָ בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא כְּרַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן
Immediately, even the sons of men die as soon as the sun's heat oppresses them; they immediately die, and they established it in the world to come like Rabbi Shimon.

בֶּן לָקִישׁ דְּאָמַר "אֵין גֵּיהִנָּם לֶעָתִיד לָבוֹא אֶלָּא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מוֹצִיא חַמָּה מִנַּרְתִּיקָה" הֲרֵי בֵּאֲרוּ
Ben Lakish, who said, "There is no Gehenna for the future, but rather the Holy One, blessed be He, will bring out the sun from its sheath," they have explained it.

כִּי זוֹ הַמֵּימְרָא שֶׁל רַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן לָקִישׁ אֵינָהּ [אֶלָּא] בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהוּא עוֹלָם שֶׁאַחֲרֵי[הּ] הַתְּחִיָּה
Because this is the teaching of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, it is not [but] in the world to come, and it is a world after [the] resurrection.

כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָנוּ עֲתִידִים לְבָאֵר בְּרָאָיוֹת גְּמוּרוֹת וְכֵן הַמִּימְרָה הַזּוֹ שְׁנוּיָה בְּבְרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה (פ"ו ט') גַּלְגַּל חַמָּה
As we are destined to clarify with conclusive proofs, and likewise this saying is found in Bereishit Rabbah (6:9) 'the sun's wheel'.

יֵשׁ לוֹ נֵרְתִּיק מָה טַעַם "לְשַׁמֵּשׁ שָׁם אֹהֶל בָּהֶם" וּבְרֵכָה שֶׁל מַיִם לְפָנָיו בְּשָׁעָה שֶׁהוּא יוֹצֵא
He has a case, what is the reason for "to serve there a tent with them" and a pool of water before him when he goes out?

הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מְתַיֵּשׁ אֶת כּוֹחוֹ בַּמַּיִם שֶׁלֹּא יָצָא וְיִשְׂרֹף אֶת הָעוֹלָם אֲבָל לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא הַקָּדוֹשׁ
The Holy One, blessed be He, tires His strength in the water so that He will not come out and burn the world, but in the future the Holy One...

בָּרוּךְ הוּא מְעַרְטְלוֹ וּמְלַהֵט בּוֹ אֶת הָרְשָׁעִים מָה טַעַם "וּלְהַט אוֹתָם הַיּוֹם הַבָּא"
Blessed is He who strips them and burns the wicked in them. What is the reason for "and burn them on the coming day"?

וְאַתָּה יוֹדֵעַ שֶׁדִּין גֵּיהִנּוֹם בְּכׇל יוֹם הוּא מִכְּלַל הַזְּמַן הַזֶּה הַהוֹוֶה עַכְשָׁו כְּפִי מָה שֶׁנִּתְפָּרֵשׁ מִדְּבָרַי
And you know that the judgment of Gehenna every day is from the time of this present moment, as it was explained in my words.

רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה וְזוֹ הַנִּזְכָּר בְּכָאן בְּזוֹ הַמֵּימְרָא אֵינוֹ אֶלָּא לֶעָתִיד לָבוֹא לִכְשֶׁיִּתְעַרְטֵל הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ מִן הַנַּרְתִּיק
Our sages, may their memory be blessed, and that which is mentioned here in this saying is not but for the future to come when the sun will be stripped of its sheath.

הַזֶּה שֶׁהִזְכִּירוּ עָלָיו שֶׁהוּא בְּתוֹכוֹ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּמוֹ שֶׁכָּתוּב "לְשַׁמֵּשׁ שָׁם אֹהֶל בָּהֶם" וְהֶחְזִירוּ עוֹד מֵימְרָא
This one that they mentioned about him that he is within it in this world, as it is written "to serve there a tent among them", and they returned another saying.

זוּ בְּמִדְרָשׁ תְּהִלִּים וְאָמְרוּ מָה הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עוֹשֶׂה לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא שׁוֹלֵף אוֹתוֹ מִנַּרְתִּיקוֹ וּמְבִיאוֹ לָרָקִיעַ
This is in the Midrash of Psalms, and they said what the Holy One, blessed be He, does in the future: He draws it from its sheath and brings it to the sky.

שְׁנֵי וְדָן בּוֹ אֶת הָרְשָׁעִים וְכֵן דִּבְרֵי הַחֲכָם הָאַחֵר (ב"ר פ"ו י') וְהוּא רַבִּי יְהוּדָה בְּרַבִּי
He judged the wicked and so on, and likewise the words of the other sage (B"ר P"VI Y') and he is Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi.

אֱלַעִי אָמַר לֹא יוֹם וְלֹא גֵּיהִנֹּם אֶלָּא אֵשׁ הִיא שֶׁהִיא יוֹצֵאת מִגּוּפוֹ וּמִלַּהֲטָתוֹ כׇּל הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה
Elai said that it is not the day nor Gehenna, but rather the fire that comes out of his body and from his burning of all these things.

לְעָתִיד הֵם וְכֵן אָמְרוּ עוֹד (מִדְרָשׁ תְּהִלִּים יט) אֲפִלּוּ בְּשָׁעָה שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מַחְזִיר נְשָׁמוֹת לְנִדְנֵיהֶן
For the future they are, and so they said again (Midrash Tehillim 19) even at the time when the Holy One, blessed be He, returns souls to their bodies.

נִשְׁמָתָן קָשָׁה לָהֶן וְכׇו׳ אֵלֶּה שְׁתַּיִם הַמֵּימָרוֹת עִנְיָן אֶחָד לְיוֹם הָעָתִיד שֶׁכָּתוּב "וְאֵלֶּה לַחֲרָפוֹת לְדִרְאוֹן עוֹלָם"
Their soul is difficult for them, etc. These two sayings have one matter for the future day that is written "And these are for reproach, for eternal disgrace."

וְאֵיךְ יַעֲלֶה עַל לֵב גּוֹרֵס הַתַּלְמוּד שֶׁיֹּאמַר רֵישׁ לָקִישׁ אֵין גֵּיהִנֹּם וְכַמָּה בְּרֵיָּתוֹת שְׁנוּיוֹת בַּתַּלְמוּד בָּעִנְיָן
And how can it come to the mind of a student of the Talmud that Reish Lakish would say that there is no Gehenna, and how many baraitot are mentioned in the Talmud on this matter?

הַמָּקוֹם וְהָאֵשׁ הֵם כְּדֶתְנַיָּא בְּפֶסָחִים (נ"ד א') אָמַר רַבִּי יוֹסֵי אוֹר שֶׁבָּרָא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא בַּשֵּׁנִי
"The place and the fire are as it is taught in Pesachim (54a) that Rabbi Yosei said: The light that the Holy One blessed be He created on the second day."

בַּשַּׁבָּת אֵין לוֹ כְּבִיָּה עוֹלָמִית וְהָיוּ מַקְשִׁים עַל רַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן לָקִישׁ מִן הַבָּרַיְתָא וְסוֹתְרִין דְּבָרָיו
On Shabbat, he does not have an eternal extinguishing, and they were questioning Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish from the baraita and contradicting his words.

בְּתִיּוּבְתָּא וְהוּא עַצְמוֹ רַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן לָקִישׁ הִזְכִּיר בְּעֵרוּבִין (י"ט א') אוֹר שֶׁל גֵּיהִנּוֹם וְהַלָּשׁוֹן עַצְמוֹ מוֹכִיחַ
In the answer and he himself Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish mentioned in Eruvin (19a) the light of Gehenna and the language itself proves it.

שלא אמר "אין גיהנם בעולם" אלא "אין גיהנם לעתיד לבא" אלא שהעניין כמו שפירשתי והדברים כמו


שֶׁבֵּאֵרְנוּ וְעִם כׇּל זֶה גִּלָּה לָנוּ הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה דַּעְתּוֹ שֶׁהוּא מַאֲמִין בְּעֹנֶשׁ דִּין וְצַעַר יִהְיֶה
that we explained, and with all this the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, revealed to us his opinion that he believes in the punishment of divine judgment and that there will be suffering.

בְּאֵי זֶה זְמַן שֶׁיִּהְיֶה אַחֲרֵי הַמָּוֶת אֶלָּא שֶׁלֹּא הִתְבַּאֵר לְדַעְתּוֹ בַּתַּלְמוּד וְלֹא הִסְתַּפֵּק מִמֶּנּוּ אֶלָּא אֵיכוּת
At what time will it be after death, except that it was not clarified in his opinion in the Talmud, and he was not satisfied with it except for its quality.

הַדִּין וְהַצַּעַר הַזֶּה וְזֶה הִתְנַצְּלוּת לָרַב וְלִמּוּד זְכוּת לְחָכָם גָּדוֹל וְחָסִיד כְּמוֹתוֹ זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה וּפֵרוּשׁ לְמֵימְרָא
This judgment and sorrow, and this apology to the rabbi and the study of merit for a great and pious scholar like him, may his memory be blessed, and an explanation of the saying.

שֶׁלְּרַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן לָקִישׁ שֶׁלֹּא תְּשַׁבֵּשׁ דַּעַת קְצָת הַתַּלְמִידִים אוֹ שֶׁלֹּא יִתְלוּ בָּהּ הַחִיצוֹנִים שֶׁהִטִּינָה בְּלִבָּם.
of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, so that you will not confuse the minds of some of the students or that the outsiders will not hang on to it, who have hatred in their hearts.

וְכׇלְלוֹ שֶׁלְּדָבָר מְבֹאָר הוּא מִדִּבְרֵי חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה וְאָחוּז בְּיַד מְקַבְּלֵי הַתּוֹרָה שֶׁגֵּיהִנּוֹם הוּא מְקוֹם דִּין
And its summary, that the matter is clear, is from the words of the sages, may their memory be blessed, and is held in the hand of the receivers of the Torah, that Gehenna is a place of judgment.

וּמִשְׁפָּט לְעַנֵּשׁ בּוֹ הַחוֹטְאִים בְּנַפְשׁוֹתָם בְּיִסּוּרִין וְצַעַר שֶׁאֵין לָהֶם דִּמְיוֹן בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה לְפִי שֶׁיִּסּוּרֵי הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה
And a judgment to punish with it the sinners in their souls with torments and pain that have no comparison in this world, because the torments of this world...

הֵם בְּגוּף שָׁפֵל גַּס הַבְּרִיָּה וְעָב וְכָבֵד וְהָעֹנֶשׁ וְהַצַּעַר הַהוּא בְּנֶפֶשׁ הַזַּכָּה הַדַּקָּה הַבָּאָה בְּבִרְיָתָהּ וְכִמְעַט
They are in a low, coarse, heavy body, and the punishment and that sorrow are in the pure, fine soul that comes in its creation, and almost.

שֶׁרֶגֶשׁ הָאָדָם בִּנְגִיעַת הַמַּחַט בִּבְשָׂרוֹ רַב מֵהֶרְגֵּשׁ הַחֲמוֹר מִפְּנֵי גַּסּוּת בְּרִיָּתוֹ וְאַף בִּבְנֵי אָדָם זַכֵּי הַגּוּף
That the feeling of a person when a needle touches his flesh is greater than the feeling of a donkey because of the coarseness of his creation, and even in humans, the pure body.

וְהַנְּקִיִּים בְּדֵעוֹת וּבִיצִירָתָם מַרְגִּישִׁין בְּיִסּוּרִין וְצַעַר יוֹתֵר מִן הַגַּסִּים עֲבֵי הַגּוּף מְשֻׁבְּשֵׁי הַדַּעַת וְהַהַרְגָּשׁ הַמֻּרְגָּלִים בְּמְלָאכוֹת
Those who are pure in their thoughts and creations feel pain and suffering more than the coarse, thick-bodied, confused in mind and feeling, who are accustomed to labor.

הַכְּבֵדוּת וְהַנִּמְבָּזוּת שֶׁנַּעֲשָׂה בְּשָׂרָם כִּבְשַׂר הַסּוּס וְהַפֶּרֶד כֵּן הַרְגַּשׁ הַנֶּפֶשׁ בְּיִסּוּרֶיהָ גָּדוֹל מְאוֹד מִיִּסּוּרֵי הַגּוּף לָרֹב
The heaviness and the contempt that their flesh became like the flesh of a horse and a mule, so the feeling of the soul in its suffering is very great from the suffering of the body for the most part.

הַרְגָּשָׁתָהּ וּזְכוּת בְּרִיתָהּ וְאֵין עֵרֶךְ וּדְמִיּוֹן בֵּין אוֹתוֹ הַצַּעַר הַחָזָק הַגָּדוֹל וּבֵין שְׁאַר בַּעֲלֵי הַחַיִּים בְּגוּפוֹתָם
Her feeling and the merit of her covenant, and there is no comparison between that strong and great pain and the rest of the living beings in their bodies.

בְּשׁוּם פָּנִים וְעוֹד הַדִּין הַזֶּה נִכְפָּל עַל מְחֻיָּבֵי הַכֶּרֶת בְּיוֹם הַדִּין הַגָּדוֹל וְנִדּוֹנִין בּוֹ בְּגֵיהִנֹּם עַד
In any case, and this judgment is also doubled upon those who are obligated to be judged on the great Day of Judgment, and they are judged in Gehenna until...

שֶׁמִּתְכַּלִּין שָׁם לָדַעַת רַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן לָקִישׁ בְּחַמָּה הַיּוֹצֵאת מִנַּרְתִּיקָה הֵם נִדּוֹנִין וּמִכׇּל מָקוֹם מִיסוּרֵי אֵשׁ
Those who are looking there to know the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish regarding the sun that emerges from its sheath, they are judged, and nevertheless they suffer the torments of fire.

שְׁלָגֵי-הַגֵּהִנֹּם הִיא שֶׁהַחַמָּה שֶׁנִּתְעַרְטְלָה מִן הַנַּרְתִּיק מִיְּסוֹדֵי הָאֵשׁ הָעֶלְיוֹן שֶׁאוֹר שְׁלָגֵי-הַגֵּהִנֹּם הוּא מִמֶּנּוּ וּכְמוֹ שֶׁנִּתְפָּרֵשׁ לְמַעְלָה
The snow of Gehenna is that which the sun, which was stripped of its sheath from the foundations of the upper fire, whose light is from Gehenna, and as was explained above.

וּמִכָּאן יָבִין כׇּל בַּעַל שֵׂכֶל שֶׁאֵין מַחְלוֹקֶת בֵּין רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה בְּעִקָּר מִכׇּל עִקָּרֵי הַדִּין הַלָּלוּ
And from here every person of understanding will understand that there is no dispute among our sages, may their memory be blessed, regarding the primary principle of these laws.

הָעֲתִידִין לִהְיוֹת וְכׇל דְּבָרֵיהֶם עוֹלִים בְּסִגְנוֹן אֶחָד.
Those who are to be and all their words rise in one style.

וְאַחַר שֶׁנִּתְבָּאֵר קְצָת מֵעִנְיַן הַדִּין וְהָעֹנֶשׁ שֶׁיַּצִּילֵנוּ בַּעַל הָרַחֲמִים מִמֶּנּוּ צְרִיכִין אָנוּ לְבָאֵר עִנְיַן הַשָּׂכָר שֶׁיְּזַכֵּנוּ
And after it has been clarified somewhat about the matter of judgment and punishment that the Master of Mercy will save us from it, we must clarify the matter of reward that He will grant us.

בְּעַל הַגְּמוּל עָלָיו וְהוּא בִּדְבָרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה שְׁנֵי שֵׁמוֹת "גַּן עֵדֶן" וְ"הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" מִלְּבַד טוֹבוֹת
The owner of the reward upon him, and he is in the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed, two names: "Garden of Eden" and "the World to Come" besides good things.

הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּגוֹן יְמוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ לְחַיִּים וּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים שֶׁבְּאוֹתוֹ זְמַן שֶׁאֵין אָנוּ מְדַבְּרִים עַתָּה בָּהֶם וּתְחִלָּה
This world is like the days of the Messiah, for life and resurrection of the dead, at that time when we are not speaking about them now, and at first.

נֶאֱמַר שֶׁשָּׂכַר הַמִּצְוֹת כֻּלָּם וְהַגְּמוּל הַטּוֹב דָּבָר פָּשׁוּט הוּא בִּדְבָרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה שֶׁהָעִקָּר הַגָּדוֹל הוּא
It is said that the reward of all the commandments and the good reward is a simple matter in the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed, that the great principle is.

חַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֲבָל הַשָּׂכָר הַקּוֹדֵם וְהוּא מָה שֶׁיַּגִּיעַ לָאָדָם אַחֲרֵי הַמָּוֶת הוּא גַּן עֵדֶן כְּמוֹ
The life of the world to come, but the previous reward and it is what will come to a person after death is Paradise like ...

שֶׁבֵּאַרְנוּ מִגֵּיהִנּוֹם שֶׁהוּא הָעֹנֶשׁ הַמַּגִּיעַ לָרָשָׁע אַחֲרֵי הַמָּוֶת מִיָּד וְכֵן תִּמְצָא בְּכׇל מָקוֹם מִדִּבְרֵיהֶם גַּן עֵדֶן
that we explained from Gehenna that it is the punishment that reaches the wicked after death immediately, and likewise you will find in every place of their words the Garden of Eden.

הֶפֵּךְ מִגֵּיהִנּוֹם כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ בְּעֵרוּבִין (יט א') יָפָה דָּנְתָה יָפָה תָּקַנְתָּ גֵּיהִנּוֹם לָרְשָׁעִים וְגַן עֵדֶן לַצַּדִּיקִים
It turned from Gehenna as they said in Erubin (19a): "You judged well, you fixed Gehenna for the wicked and the Garden of Eden for the righteous."

וְאָמְרוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת חֲגִיגָה (טו א') "גַּם אֶת זֶה לְעֻמַּת זֶה עָשָׂה הָאֱלֹהִים" בָּרָא צַדִּיקִים בָּרָא רְשָׁעִים
And they said in the tractate of Chagigah (15a) "Even this opposite this did God" created righteous ones, created wicked ones.

בָּרָא גַּן עֵדֶן בָּרָא גֵּיהִנֹּם כׇּל אֶחָד יֵשׁ לוֹ שְׁנֵי חֲלָקִים אֶחָד בְּגַן עֵדֶן אֶחָד בְּגֵיהִנֹּם
He created the Garden of Eden and Gehenna; each one has two parts, one in the Garden of Eden and one in Gehenna.

זָכָה צַדִּיק נוֹטֵל חֶלְקוֹ וְחֵלֶק חֲבֵרוֹ בְּגַן עֵדֶן נִתְחַיֵּב רָשָׁע נוֹטֵל חֶלְקוֹ וְחֵלֶק חֲבֵרוֹ בְּגֵיהִנֹּם וְשָׁנִינוּ
A righteous person who is successful takes his share and his friend's share in the Garden of Eden. A wicked person who is guilty takes his share and his friend's share in Gehenna. And we have learned.

בְּאָבוֹת (ה יט) מָה בֵּין תַּלְמִידָיו שֶׁל אַבְרָהָם אָבִינוּ לְתַלְמִידָיו שֶׁל בִּלְעָם הָרָשָׁע תַּלְמִידָיו שֶׁל בִּלְעָם הָרָשָׁע יוֹרְדִין לְגֵיהִנֹּם
In Avot (5:19) what is the difference between the disciples of Abraham our father and the disciples of Balaam the wicked? The disciples of Balaam the wicked go down to Gehenna.

שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְאַתָּה אֱלֹהִים תּוֹרִידֵם לִבְאֵר שַׁחַת" תַּלְמִידָיו שֶׁל אַבְרָהָם אָבִינוּ יוֹרְשִׁין גַּן עֵדֶן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "לְהַנְחִיל אֹהֲבַי יֵשׁ"
As it is said, "And you, God, will bring them down to the pit of destruction" - the disciples of Abraham our father inherit the Garden of Eden, as it is said, "to inherit my lovers is."

וְאוֹצְרוֹתֵיהֶם אֲמַלֵּא" וְעוֹד שָׁם (ה כ) "עַז פָּנִים לְגֵיהִנֹּם וּבֹשֶׁת פָּנִים לְגַן עֵדֶן" וְאָמְרוּ (ח יח)
"And I will fill their treasures, and also there (in the same place) it says, 'A bold face to Gehenna and a shameful face to the Garden of Eden,' and they said (in another place)."

כֹּל הַמְּזַכֶּה אֶת הָרַבִּים אֵין חֵטְא בָּא עַל יָדוֹ שֶׁלֹּא יְהֵא הוּא בְּגַן עֵדֶן וְתַלְמִידָיו בְּגֵיהִנֹּם
Whoever justifies many people, no sin comes upon him, so that he will not be in the Garden of Eden and his disciples in Gehenna.

וּבְפֶרֶק תְּפִלַּת הַשַּׁחַר (בְּרָכוֹת כה ב') תַּנְיָא גַּבֵּי פְּטִירָתוֹ שֶׁל רַבָּן יוֹחָנָן בֶּן זַכַּאי שֶׁהָיָה בּוֹכֶה וְאָמַר
And in the chapter of the morning prayer (Berakhot 25b) it is taught regarding the passing of R. Yochanan ben Zakkai that he was weeping and said.

לְתַלְמִידָיו וְלֹא עוֹד אֶלָּא שֶׁיֵּשׁ לְפָנַי שְׁנֵי דְּרָכִים אֶחָד שֶׁל גַּן עֵדֶן וְאֶחָד שֶׁל גֵּיהִנֹּם וְאֵינִי יוֹדֵעַ בְּאֵי
For his disciples, and not only that, but there are before me two paths, one of the Garden of Eden and one of Gehenna, and I do not know which.

זו מוֹלִיכִין אוֹתִי הֲרֵי שֶׁהָיָה [מְתַיֵּר] עַכְשָׁו מִגֵּיהִנּוֹם וּמְצַפֶּה לְגַן עֵדֶן וּבְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת רַבָּה (ב ב)
This is leading me, for it was [fearful] now of Gehenna and expecting Eden, and in the Midrash Rabbah (B B).

אָמְרוּ מִי שֶׁהוּא מְשַׁמֵּר אֶת הַתּוֹרָה הֲרֵי גַּן עֵדֶן לְפָנָיו מִי שֶׁאֵינוֹ מְשַׁמֵּר אֶת הַתּוֹרָה הֲרֵי
They said: He who guards the Torah, behold the Garden of Eden is before him; he who does not guard the Torah, behold...

גֵּיהִנּוֹם לְפָנָיו וְכׇל־שֶׁהוּא
Gehenna is before him, etc.

בְּוַיְקָרָא רַבָּה (ל"ב א') בְּשָׁעָה שֶׁהַצַּדִּיקִים עוֹלִים מִתּוֹךְ גַּן עֵדֶן וְרוֹאִין אֶת הָרְשָׁעִים שֶׁהֵם נִדּוֹנִין בְּגֵיהִנּוֹם
In Vayikra Rabbah (32:1) at the time when the righteous rise up from the Garden of Eden and see the wicked who are judged in Gehenna.

נַפְשָׁם שְׂמֵחָה וְגוֹ' וּבְהַגָּדָה דְּרַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֶּן לֵוִי (כְּתוּבוֹת עז ב') אָמְרוּ אַחְוִי לִי דּוּכְתַּאי אַחְוִי
Their soul rejoiced, etc., and in the aggadah of Rabbi Joshua ben Levi (Ketubot 77b) they said, "Show me my place, show me."

לִיהּ דּוּכְתֵּיהּ שׁוֹוַר וְנָפַל בְּגַן עֵדֶן וְאָמְרוּ חֲזִיָּה לְרַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן יוֹחַאי וְכוּ' וּבְבְרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה (פֶּסַ"ה י"ח)
He fell from his place and fell into the Garden of Eden, and they said that Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai saw it, etc., and in Bereishit Rabbah (chapter 57, verse 18).

בְּמַעֲשֵׂה דִּיקִים אִישׁ צְרוּרוֹת בֶּן אֲחוֹתוֹ שֶׁל רַבִּי יוֹסֵי בֶּן יוֹעֶזֶר אָמְרוּ נִתְנַמְנֵם יוֹסֵי בֶּן יוֹעֶזֶר
In the story of the righteous man, a man of bundles, the son of Rabbi Yosei ben Yo'ezer's sister, they said that Yosei ben Yo'ezer fell asleep.

אִישׁ צְרִידָה וְרָאָה מִטָּתוֹ פּוֹרַחַת בָּאֲוִיר אָמַר לְשָׁעָה קַלָּה קָדְמַנִּי זֶה לְגַן עֵדֶן וּבְמִדְרַשׁ רוּת אָמְרוּ
A man of the desert saw his bed floating in the air and said, "A short time ago this one preceded me to the Garden of Eden," and in the Midrash of Ruth they said.

"וְאָרוּחָתוֹ אֲרוּחַת תָּמִיד נִתְּנָה לוֹ מֵאֵת הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּבָר יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ כׇּל יְמֵי חַיָּיו" יְמֵי חַיָּיו דְּמַאן
"And his food, the daily food, was given to him from the king, a thing of each day in his lifetime" - whose lifetime?

רַב וְלֵוִי חַד אָמַר שֶׁלְּיֵהוֹיָכִין וְחַד אָמַר שֶׁלְּאוֹיֵל מְרוֹדָךְ אָמַר רַבִּי שְׁמוּאֵל בַּר נַחְמָנִי מַסְתַּבְּרָא כְּמַאן
Rav and Levi: one said of Jehoiakim and one said of Oeil Merodach. Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachmani said: it is more reasonable according to whom?

דְּאָמַר שְׁלִיָּהוּיְכִין שֶׁמִּשָּׁעָה שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא נוֹתֵן שָׁלוֹם לַצַּדִּיקִים אֵינוֹ נוֹטְלָה מֵהֶם אֶלָּא הוֹלֶכֶת עִמָּהֶם לַגַּן
He said that from the time that the Holy One, blessed be He, gives peace to the righteous, He does not take it away from them, but rather it goes with them to the Garden.

עֵדֶן לָמְדוּ בְּמִלָּה זֹאת שֶׁפְּטִירָתָן שֶׁלַּצַּדִּיקִים מֵעוֹלָם הַזֶּה לְגַן עֵדֶן הוּא וּבְפֶרֶק שֵׁנִי דְּתָמוּרָה (ט"ז א')
Eden, they learned from this word that the passing of the righteous from this world to the Garden of Eden is, and in the second chapter of Temurah (16a).

גָּרְסִינָן אָמַר רַב יְהוּדָה אָמַר שְׁמוּאֵל בְּשָׁעָה שֶׁנִּפְטַר מֹשֶׁה רַבֵּנוּ [לְגַן עֵדֶן] אָמַר לְיְהוֹשֻׁעַ שְׁאַל מִמֶּנִּי
We learn: Rav Yehuda said: Shmuel said: At the hour when Moses our teacher passed away [to the Garden of Eden], he said to Joshua: Ask from me.

כׇּל סָפֵק שֶׁיֵּשׁ לְךָ וְכוּ' נִמְצֵינוּ לוֹמְדִין שֶׁשָּׂכַר הָאָדָם לְאַחַר הַמִּיתָה הוּא בְּגַן עֵדֶן.
Any doubt you have etc. we find that the reward of man after death is in the Garden of Eden.

וּמָה שָׂכָר וְעֹנֶשׁ יֵשׁ לִנְפָשׁוֹת הַצַּדִּיקִים בְּגַן עֵדֶן הִנֵּה דָּבָר זֶה עִקָּרוֹ בַּתּוֹרָה וּפֵרוּשׁוֹ בִּדְבָרֵי סוֹפְרִים
And what reward and punishment is there for the souls of the righteous in the Garden of Eden? This matter is rooted in the Torah and its explanation is in the words of the Sages.

שֶׁגַּן עֵדֶן מָצוּי הוּא בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בָּאָרֶץ וְשֶׁאַרְבַּע נְהָרוֹת יוֹצְאִין מִשָּׁם וְאֶחָד מֵהֶם פְּרָת הַסּוֹבֵב אֶרֶץ
that the Garden of Eden is found in this world in the land and that four rivers flow out from it and that one of them is the Euphrates that surrounds the land.

יִשְׂרָאֵל וְכֹל מָה שֶׁבָּא בַּכָּתוּב מִפְּשׁוּטֵי סוֹד בְּרֵאשִׁית הַכֹּל אֱמֶת אֵין מִקְרָא יוֹצֵא מִידֵי פְּשׁוּטוֹ וַאֲנָשִׁי
Israel and all that comes in the scripture from the simple secrets of the beginning of Genesis, everything is true; no scripture goes beyond its simple meaning, and the people.

הַמִּדּוֹת עַצְמָן יוֹדוּ וְיֹאמְרוּ שֶׁגַּן עֵדֶן תַּחַת קַו הַהַשְׁוָיָה שֶׁלֹּא יוֹסִיף הַיּוֹם וְלֹא יֶחְסַר וּבְסִפְרֵי הָרְפוּאוֹת
The measures themselves will confess and say that the Garden of Eden is under the line of equality that the day will not add nor subtract, and in the books of medicine.

לִיּוֹנִים הַקַּדְמוֹנִים וְכֵן בְּסֵפֶר אָסָף הַיְּהוּדִי יְסַפֵּר כִּי אַסְפַּקְלִינוּס חָכָם מִקֶּדֶם וְאַרְבָּעִים אִישׁ מִן הַחַרְטוּמִים מְלֻמָּדִי
To the ancient lions and also in the book of Asaph the Jew it will tell that Aspeclinus a wise man from Kedem and forty men from the magicians learned.

הַסְּפָרִים הָלְכוּ הֲלוֹךְ בָּאָרֶץ וַיַּעַבְרוּ מֵעֵבֶר לְהוֹדוּ קִדְמַת עֵדֶן לִמְצֹא קְצָת עֲצֵי הָרְפוּאוֹת וְעֵץ הַחַיִּים לְמַעַן
The books went walking in the land and they passed over beyond India, the east of Eden, to find some of the trees of healing and the tree of life, for the sake of.

תִּגְדַּל תִּפְאַרְתָּם עַל כׇּל חֲכָמֵי הָאָרֶץ וּבְבוֹאָם אֶל הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא וְיִבְרַק עֲלֵיהֶם לַהַט הַחֶרֶב הַמִּתְהַפֶּכֶת וְיִתְלַהֲטוּ
May their glory be magnified over all the wise of the earth, and when they come to that place, the flashing of the revolving sword will strike them, and they will be consumed.

כֻּלָּם בְּשִׁבּוּבֵי אֵשׁ הַבָּרָק וְלֹא נִמְלַט מֵהֶם אִישׁ וְתִשְׁבּוֹת חׇכְמַת הָרְפוּאָה מִן הַגּוֹיִם הָהֵם יָמִים רַבִּים
All of them in the sparks of the lightning's fire, and no one escaped from them, and the wisdom of medicine was taken away from those nations for many days.

עַד מָלֹךְ אַרְתַּחְשַׁשְׁתָּא הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאַחֲרֵי כֵן נִתְחַדְּשָׁה בָּהֶם דַּעַת הָרוֹפְאִים עַל יְדֵי הַנְּקוּבִים בַּשֵּׁם בַּמְּלָאכָה הַהִיא
Until the reign of King Artaxerxes, and after that the knowledge of the doctors was renewed in them by those who were called by name in that work.

וְכֹל אֵלֶּה דִּבְרֵי אֱמֶת יְדוּעִים וּמְפֻרְסָמִים גַּם הַיּוֹם כִּי רַבִּים מִבָּאֵי הָאָרֶץ הַלָּזוֹ אַרְצָה בְּנֵי קֶדֶם
And all these are words of truth, known and famous even today, because many of the comers to this land are the sons of the east.

יִרְאוּ מֵרָחוֹק הַלַּהַט הַמִּתְהַפֶּכֶת.
They will see from afar the flame that is turning over.

אֲבָל סוֹד הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה שֶׁהַדְּבָרִים כְּפוּלִים כִּי גַּן עֵדֶן וְאַרְבַּע נְהָרוֹת וְעֵץ הַחַיִּים וְעֵץ הַדַּעַת נָטַע
But the secret of this matter is that the things are doubled, because of the Garden of Eden and the four rivers and the Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.

שֵׁם הָאֱלֹהִים וְכֵן הַכְּרוּבִים וְלַהַט הַחֶרֶב הַמִּתְהַפֶּכֶת גַּם עֲלֵה הַתְּאֵנָה וְהַחֲגוּרוֹת וְכֻתָּנוֹת אֲשֶׁר הָעֹר כֻּלָּם כִּפְשׁוּטָם
The name of God, and likewise the cherubim, and the flame of the sword that turns, also the leaf of the fig tree, and the belts and the tunics that the skin (?) all of them as plainly.

וְכַמַּשְׁמָעָם אֱמֶת הַדָּבָר וְיַצִּיב הָעִנְיָן וּלְסוֹד מֻפְלָא הוּא כִּי הֵם כְּיוֹצְרֵי דָּבָר לְהָבִין סוֹד עָמֹק מִשֶּׁל
And as it is understood, the truth of the matter and the stability of the situation, and to a wondrous secret, is that they are like creators of a thing to understand a deep secret from that.

כְּמוֹ שֶׁשָּׁנִינוּ (רֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה כד א') "דְּמוּת צוּרוֹת לְבָנוֹת הָיוּ לוֹ לְרַבָּן גַּמְלִיאֵל בָּעֲלִיָּה בְּטַבְלָה בַּכּוֹתֶל"
As we have learned (Rosh Hashanah 24a) "He had white statues of forms in Rabban Gamliel's upper story in a tablet on the wall."

שֶׁבָּהֶן מַרְאֶה אֶת הַדַּיּוֹטוֹת כָּזֶה רְאִיתֶם אוֹ כָּזֶה רְאִיתֶם" כִּי כֵּן מְלֶאכֶת בַּמִּשְׁכָּן בִּשְׁלוֹשָׁה מְקוֹמוֹת חָצֵר
In which he shows the uneducated people this, or that you have seen, because thus is the work in the Tabernacle in three places of the courtyard.

וְאֹהֶל וְלִפְנִים מִן הַפָּרֹכֶת וּבְמִקְדָּשׁ עֲזָרָה וְהֵיכָל וּדְבִיר וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר בְּכׇל מָקוֹם וּמָקוֹם מִן הַכֵּלִים וְצִיּוּרֵי
And the Tent and inside the veil and in the Temple courtyard and the Hall and the Holy of Holies and all that is in every place and place from the vessels and paintings.

הַכְּרוּבִים כֻּלָּם לְהָבִין סוֹדוֹת מַעֲשֵׂה עוֹלָם הָעֶלְיוֹן וְהָאֶמְצָעִי וְהַשָּׁפָל וְרִמְזֵי כׇּל הַמֶּרְכָּבָה שָׁם וְכֵן הַנִּבְרָאִים עַצְמָם
The cherubs all to understand the secrets of the making of the upper, middle, and lower worlds and the hints of all the chariot there, and likewise the created beings themselves.

בִּיצִירָתָן בְּדָמוּת נִבְרְאוּ כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ בְּסֵפֶר יְצִירָה (ו ד) סִימָן לַדָּבָר וְעֵדִים נֶאֱמָנִים עוֹלָם וְשָׁנָה וְנֶפֶשׁ
In their creation they were created in the image, as it is said in the Book of Creation (6:4) a sign for the matter and faithful witnesses: world, year, and soul.

וְאָדָם הָרִאשׁוֹן מַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו שֶׁלְּהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מִבְּחִיר בְּנֵי אָדָם הָיָה בְּתְבוּנָה וּבְדַעַת וְהִשְׁכִּינוֹ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא
And the first man, the work of the hands of the Holy One, blessed be He, from among the chosen of the sons of men, was in wisdom and understanding, and the Holy One, blessed be He, settled him.

הוּא יִתְבָּרֵךְ בְּמִבְחַר הַמְּקוֹמוֹת לְהֲנָאַת וּלְתוֹעֶלֶת הַגּוּף וְצִיֵּר בַּמָּקוֹם הַהוּא הַנִּכְבָּד כׇּל מַעֲשֵׂה הָעוֹלָם הָעֶלְיוֹן הוּא
May He be blessed in the choice of places for the enjoyment and benefit of the body, and He painted in that noble place all the works of the upper world.

עולם הנשמות בציור גשמי להבין משם יסודי כל נברא גופי ונפשי ומלאכי וכל מה שיש בהשגת


הַנִּבְרָא לְהַשִּׂיג מִן הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ גַּם הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא נִכְבָּד מִכׇּל מְקוֹמוֹת הָעוֹלָם הַשָּׁפֵל מִן הַמּוֹצָק אֲשֶׁר
The one created to attain from the Creator, may He be blessed, also that place is honored above all places in the lowly world, from the solid which...

עַל רֹאשָׁן מִן הָעוֹלָם אֶמְצָעִי וְהָעֶלְיוֹן וְעַל כֵּן יִרְאוּ בּוֹ מַרְאוֹת הָאֱלֹהִים יוֹתֵר מִשְּׁאַר מְקוֹמוֹת כַּאֲשֶׁר
On their head from the middle and upper world, and therefore they will see in it the visions of God more than other places, as ...

אֲנַחְנוּ מַאֲמִינִים כִּי אֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל וִירוּשָׁלַיִם מְקוֹמוֹת נִכְבָּדִים מְיֻחָדִים לִנְבוּאָה בְּעַצְמָן מִפְּנֵי מוֹצָקָם וְכׇל שֶׁכֵּן בַּיִת
We believe that the Land of Israel and Jerusalem are special, distinguished places for prophecy in themselves because of their solidity, and all the more so a house.

הַמְּקַדֵּשׁ כִּסֵּא ה' כְּעִנְיָן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "מָה נוֹרָא הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה אֵין זֶה כִּי אִם בֵּית אֱלֹהִים וְזֶה"
The one who sanctifies the throne of God, as in the matter that is said: "How awesome is this place; it is none other than the house of God, and this..."

שַׁעַר הַשָּׁמַיִם תָּלָה נְבוּאָתוֹ הַבָּאָה אֵלָיו מִבְּלִי הַקְדָּמַת כַּוָּנָה בְּמַעֲלַת הַמָּקוֹם עַל כֵּן שׁוֹכְנֵי גַּן עֵדֶן
The gate of heaven hung his prophecy that came to him without the prior intention of the place's greatness; therefore, the inhabitants of the Garden of Eden.

שֶׁהוּא בְּמִבְחָר לַמֵּבִין בְּצִיּוּרֵי הַדְּבָרִים כׇּל סוֹדוֹת הָעֶלְיוֹנִים וְנַפְשָׁם מִתְעַלָּה בְּלִמּוּד הַהוּא וְרוֹאֶה מַרְאוֹת אֱלֹהִים בְּחֶבְרַת
that he is in the chosen for the one who understands in the images of things all the secrets of the upper ones, and their soul ascends in that study and sees the visions of God in the company of.

כְּבוֹד הָעֶלְיוֹנִים מִן הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא וּמַשִּׂיגִים כׇּל מָה שֶׁיּוּכַל לָדַעַת וּלְהָבִין בְּלִמּוּד מֹשֶׁה בְּסִינַי כְּעִנְיָן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר
The glory of the superiors from that place and they attain all that can be known and understood in the study of Moses at Sinai, as in the matter that is said.

אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה מַרְאֶה בָּהָר
which you show on the mountain

זֶה עִנְיָן יְדִיעָתֵנוּ בְּגַן עֵדֶן וְהַדְּבָרִים מְפֹרָשִׁים בִּדְבָרֵי חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה וְכֶבֶר רָמַז רַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר הַגָּדוֹל
This is a matter of our knowledge of the Garden of Eden, and the things are explained in the words of the sages, may their memory be blessed, and Rabbi Eliezer the Great already hinted at it.

בִּפְרָקִים שֶׁלּוֹ כָּפַל הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה שֶׁאָמַרְתִּי בְּפֶרֶק כ"א דְּתָנֵי רַבִּי זְעִירָא "וּמִפְּרִי הָעֵץ" אֵין הָעֵץ אֶלָּא
In his chapters he repeated this matter that I said in chapter 21 that Rabbi Zeira taught 'and from the fruit of the tree' – the tree is not but...

אדם שנמשל בעץ שנאמר "כי האדם עץ השדה" "אשר בתוך הגן" אין "בתוך הגן" אלא לשון


נְקִיָּה וְאֵין "גַּן" אֶלָּא הָאִשָּׁה שֶׁנִּמְשְׁלָה בַּגַּן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "גַּן נָעוּל אֲחוֹתִי כַּלָּה" וְכֵן אוֹמֵר שֶׁהָיָה סַמָּאֵל
She is pure, and "garden" refers only to the woman who is likened to a garden, as it is said, "A locked garden, my sister, my bride," and likewise it is said that it was Sammael.

רוֹכֵב עַל הַנָּחָשׁ וְאָמְרוּ שֶׁהָיָה עֵץ הַחַיִּים צוֹחַ וְאוֹמֵר כְּשֶׁנָּגְעָה בּוֹ חַוָּה "אַל תָּבוֹאֵנִי רֶגֶל גַּאֲוָה"
Riding on the snake and they said that the Tree of Life was screaming and saying when Eve touched it, "Let not the foot of pride come to me."

וַיַד רְשָׁעִים אַל תְּנַדֵּנִי" הִנֵּה עָשָׂה בְכָאן הַכֹּל מָשָׁל וְרֶמֶז וְהוּא אָמַר בְּמָקוֹם אַחֵר בְּפֶרֶק עֶשְׂרִים
"and the hand of the wicked will not move me away. Behold, he made everything here a parable and a hint. And he said in another place in chapter twenty."

"וַיְגָרֵשׁ אֶת הָאָדָם" גּוֹרָשׁ וְיָצָא אָדָם וְיָשַׁב לוֹ מִחוּץ לְגַן עֵדֶן בְּהַר הַמּוֹרִיָּה שֶׁשַּׁעַר גַּן עֵדֶן
"And he drove out the man; he was driven out and Adam went out and settled outside the Garden of Eden on Mount Moriah where the gate of the Garden of Eden is."

סָמוּךְ לְהַר הַמּוֹרִיָּה עָשָׂה אוֹתוֹ גַּן מַמָּשׁ וְזֶה אֵין צָרִיךְ רְאָיָה מִדִּבְרֵיהֶם שֶׁכׇּל הָאַגָּדוֹת מְפֹרָשׁוֹת הֵן
Near Mount Moriah he made it a real garden, and this does not need proof from their words that all the legends are explicit.

בְּגַן עֵדֶן שֶׁהוּא גַּן מַמָּשׁ בָּאָרֶץ וְאָמְרוּ (בָּבָא מְצִיעָא קִיד ב') עַל רַבִּי אַבָּהוּ עִיְּלִיהָ אֵלִיָּהוּ
In the Garden of Eden, which is a real garden on earth, and they said (Bava Metzia 101b) about Rabbi Abahu that Elijah brought him in.

לְגַן עֵדֶן וּמְלֵי לְגַלִּימֵיהָ טַרְפֵי דְאִילָנֵי בְּפֶרֶק הַמְּקַבֵּל וּבְמִדְרָשׁ תְּהִלִּים (נו) "בְּאַרְצוֹת הַחַיִּים" זוֹ אֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל
To the Garden of Eden and the fullness of its garments, the leaves of the trees, in the chapter of the receiver and in the Midrash of Psalms (50) "In the lands of life" this is the land of Israel.

דָּבָר אַחֵר זֹה גַּן עֵדֶן וּבְמִדְרָשׁ קֹהֶלֶת (ז לא) אָמְרוּ מִפְּנֵי מָה בָּרָא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא
Another thing: this is the Garden of Eden. And in the Midrash of Kohelet (7:10) they said: 'Why did the Holy One, blessed be He, create...'

גֵּיהִנּוֹם וְגַן עֵדֶן כְּדֵי שֶׁתְּהֵא זוֹ מַצִּילָה מִזּוֹ וְכַמָּה רֵיוַח בֵּינֵיהֶם רַבִּי יוֹחָנָן אָמַר כּוֹתֶל וְרַבִּי
Gehenna and the Garden of Eden, so that this one will save from that one, and how much space between them? Rabbi Yochanan said: a wall, and Rabbi ...

אָחָא אָמַר טֶפַח וְרַבָּנָן אָמְרִי שְׁתֵּי אֶצְבָּעוֹת וּבְבֵרֵשִׁית רַבָּה בִּתְחִלָּתוֹ שָׁנוּ וְהֶחְזִירוּ הַדָּבָר פַּעֲמַיִם רַבּוֹת וְכֵן
AchA said a Tefach and the Rabbis said two fingers, and in Bereishit Rabbah at its beginning they taught it and they repeated the matter many times, and so on.

בְּמָקוֹמוֹת אֲחֵרִים שֶׁהוּא גַּן מַמָּשׁ נָטוּעַ בָּאָרֶץ אֶלָּא הָעִנְיָן כְּמוֹ שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁנוּ וְכַמָּה נִכְבָּד דְּבַר רַבִּי אַבְרָהָם
In other places where it is a real garden planted in the earth, but the matter is as we have explained, and how noble is the word of Rabbi Abraham.

בֶּן עֶזְרָא זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה שֶׁכָּתַב (בְּבֵאוּר בְּרֵאשִׁית ג כד) בְּעֵץ הַדַּעַת סוֹד יָנֹעַם גַּם הַדְּבָרִים כְּמַשְׁמָעָם
Ben Ezra, may his memory be blessed, who wrote (in his commentary on Genesis 3:24) that in the Tree of Knowledge there is a pleasant secret, and also the words as they are understood.

וּבְמִדְרָשׁ שִׁיר הַשִּׁירִים אָמְרוּ "הֵבִיאַנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ חֲדָרָיו" מְלַמֵּד שֶׁעָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְהַרְאוֹת לְיִשְׂרָאֵל גַּנְזֵי מָרוֹם
And in the Midrash of the Song of Songs they said, "He brought me into the chambers of the King" – teaching that the Holy One, blessed be He, will show Israel the treasures of the heights.

הַחֲדָרִים שֶׁבַּשָּׁמַיִם רַבִּי יְהוּדָה אוֹמֵר הֲרֵי אַתָּה לוֹמֵד מִיַּעֲקֹב שֶׁאָמַר לוֹ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא "קֻם עֲלֵה"
The chambers in the heavens. Rabbi Yehuda says: Behold, you learn from Jacob that the Holy One, blessed be He, said to him, "Arise and ascend."

בֵּית אֵל" וְכוּ' מְלַמֵּד שֶׁהֶרְאָה לוֹ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא [עָלֶיהָ] לְמַעְלָה מֵעָלֶיהָ וְהֶרְאָה לוֹ חֲדָרִים שֶׁבַּמָּרוֹם
"At 'Beth El' etc. It teaches that the Holy One, blessed be He, showed him [it] above it, and showed him chambers in the heights."

דָּבָר אַחֵר "הֵבִיאַנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ חֲדָרָיו" אֵלּוּ חֲדָרֵי גַּן עֵדֶן וּמִכָּאן אָמְרוּ כְּמַעֲשֵׂה הָרָקִיעַ כֵּן מַעֲשֵׂה גַּן
Another thing: "The king brought me into his chambers" – these are the chambers of the Garden of Eden, and from here they said: "As the work of the firmament, so is the work of the Garden."

עֵדֶן וְכֻלּוֹ
Eden and so forth.

וּבְמִדְרָשׁ רַבִּי נְחוּנְיָא בֶּן הַקָּנָה אוֹמֵר מִזֶּה הַרְבֵּה סָתַם הָעִנְיָן וּמְבֹאָר הַפֵּרוּשׁ.
And in the Midrash of Rabbi Nechunya ben HaKana it is said that from this much of the matter is omitted and the explanation is clarified.

וְאִם כֵּן כֵּיוָן שֶׁהָעִנְיָן עַל דֶּרֶךְ הַנִּזְכָּר מִכׇּל מָקוֹם גַּן עֵדֶן בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה הַתַּחְתּוֹן הוּא מָה
And if so, since the matter is as mentioned, nevertheless the Garden of Eden in this lower world is what?

שְׂכַר הַנְּשָׁמוֹת שָׁם וְאֵין תּוֹעַלְתָּם בְּדָבָר גַּשְׁמִי וְלֹא בְּמָקוֹם מִמְּקוֹמוֹת הָאָרֶץ וְעוֹלַם הַתַּחְתּוֹנִים כְּבָר פָּרַשְׁתִּי שֶׁהָעִנְיָן
The reward of souls is there, and their benefit is not in any material thing nor in any place of the earth or the lower world; I have already explained that the matter.

כָּפוּל וְזֶה הַגַּן וְהָעֵדֶן הַתַּחְתּוֹנִים הֵן צִיּוּרִים לְסוֹדוֹת הָעֶלְיוֹנִים וְהַדְּבָרִים הָהֵם הָעֶלְיוֹנִים הָרְמוּזִים בְּאֵלֶּה גַּם כֵּן
Doubled and this garden and the lower Eden are pictures for the secrets of the upper ones, and those upper things hinted at in these also.

נקראים "גן ועדן" שאלו התחתונים מהן תופסין השם הזה כיצד יש בעליונים השגה שנקראת בדברי רבותינו


זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה "גַּן" וְהַשָּׂגָה לְמַעְלָה הֵימֶנָּה שֶׁהִיא הַנִּקְרֵאת "עֵדֶן" וְהוּא נִקְרָא "צְרוֹר הַחַיִּים" וְסוֹדָם עָמֹק וְתָפוּס
May their memory be blessed. "Garden" and a higher attainment, which is called "Eden," and it is called "the bundle of life," and their secret is deep and grasped.

בְּיַד מְקַבְּלֵי הָאֱמוּנָה אֲבָל פֵּרְשׁוּ לָנוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה מְקוֹם הַנְּפָשׁוֹת אָמְרוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת שַׁבָּת (קנ"ב ב')
In the hands of those who accept the faith, but the sages, may their memory be blessed, explained to us the place of souls, as they said in the tractate of Shabbat (152b).

נַפְשׁוֹתֵיהֶן שֶׁלַּצַּדִּיקִים גְּנוּזוֹת תַּחַת כִּסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדוֹנִי צְרוּרָה בְּצִרּוּר הַחַיִּים אֶת ה' אֱלֹהֶיךָ".
The souls of the righteous are hidden under the Throne of Glory, as it is said: "And the soul of my lord shall be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord your God."

וְאָמְרוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת חֲגִיגָה (י"ב א') עֲרָבוֹת שֶׁבּוֹ צֶדֶק וּמִשְׁפָּט וְגִנְזֵי חַיִּים וְגִנְזֵי בְּרָכָה וְגִנְזֵי שָׁלוֹם וּנְשָׁמוֹתֵיהֶן
And they said in the tractate of Chagigah (12a) that there are the fields of righteousness and justice, and the treasuries of life, blessing, and peace, and their souls.

שֶׁלַּצַּדִּיקִים וְרוּחוֹת נְשָׁמוֹת שֶׁעֲתִידִין לְהִבָּרְאוֹת וְשָׁם אוֹפַנִּים וְשְׂרָפִים וְחַיּוֹת הַקֹּדֶשׁ וּמַלְאֲכֵי הַשָּׁרֵת וְכִסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד וּמֶלֶךְ אֵל
for the righteous and spirits and souls that are destined to be created, and there are wheels and seraphim and holy animals and ministering angels and the throne of glory and the King of God.

חַי וְקַיָּם רָם וְנִשָּׂא שׁוֹכֵן עֲלֵיהֶם וְאָמְרוּ בַּסּוּכָה (מ"ה ב') רָאִיתִי בְּנֵי עֲלִיָּה וְהֵן מוּעָטִין וּפֵרְשׁוּ
Living and existing, exalted and elevated, dwelling upon them, and they said in the Sukkah (45b) I saw the sons of the oneness and they are few, and they explained.

הָא דְּמִסְתַּכְּלִי בְּאַסְפַּקְלַרְיָא הַמְּאִירָה הָא כְּשֶׁאֵינָה מְאִירָה וְהָבֵן הַהִסְתַּכְּלוּת הַזֶּה שֶׁאָמְרוּ עָלָיו (וַיִּקְרָא רַבָּה א י"ד)
This is about looking at the illuminated mirror; what about when it is not illuminated? And understand this looking that was said about it (Vayikra Rabbah 1:14).

מֹשֶׁה רַבֵּנוּ עָלָיו הַשָּׁלוֹם נִסְתַּכֵּל בְּאַסְפַּקְלַרְיָא הַמְּאִירָה וּשְׁאַר נְבִיאִים נִסְתַּכְּלוּ בְּשֶׁאֵינָה מְאִירָה הֵבִיאוּ לָשׁוֹן "רְאִיָּה" בְּהִסְתַּכְּלוּת
Moses our teacher, peace be upon him, looked into the shining mirror, while other prophets looked into the one that was not shining. They brought the word 'vision' in looking.

הַשֵּׂכֶל וְעִלּוּי הַהֲבָנָה לְפִיכָךְ קְרָאָם בְּנֵי עֲלִיָּה וְאָמְרוּ "כִּי לֹא יִרְאֵנִי הָאָדָם וָחָי" אֲבָל בִּשְׁעַת מִיתָתָן
The intellect and the elevation of understanding, therefore they are called "sons of the ascent" and they said, "For the man shall not see Me and live," but at the time of their death.

הֵן רוֹאִין וּבְסִפְרֵי (בְּהַעֲלוֹתְךָ קג) אָמְרוּ "יְפַקֵּד ה' אֱלֹהֵי הָרוּחוֹת לְכָל בָּשָׂר" מַגִּיד שֶׁכׇּל הָרוּחוֹת אֵינָן
They see, and in my books (in the Torah portion of Behaalotecha, chapter 13) they said, "The Lord, God of the spirits of all flesh, will count them," which tells us that all the spirits are not.

יוֹצְאוֹת אֶלָּא מִלְּפָנָיו רַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר בְּנוֹ שֶׁל רַבִּי יוֹסֵי הַגָּלִילִי אוֹמֵר סִימָן זֶה יְהֵא בְּיָדְךָ שֶׁכֹּל
Only they go out, except before him. Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei the Galilean says: This sign shall be in your hand that all ...

זְמַן שֶׁאָדָם נָתוּן בַּחַיִּים נַפְשׁוֹ פְּקוּדָה בְּיַד קוֹנוֹ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדוֹ נֶפֶשׁ כׇּל חַי" וְאוֹמֵר "בְּיָדְךָ".
The time that a person is given in life, his soul is entrusted in the hand of his Creator, as it is said, "In whose hand is the soul of every living thing," and it says, "In your hand."

אֶפְקִיד רוּחִי מֵת נוֹתְנָה בָּאוֹצָר שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדוֹנִי צְרוּרָה בְּצִרּוּר הַחַיִּים" שׁוֹמֵעַ אֲנִי בֵּין צַדִּיקִים
"I will entrust my spirit; a dead person gives it in a treasury, as it is said, 'and the soul of my master is bound up in the bundle of life.' I hear among the righteous."

בֵּין רְשָׁעִים תַּלְמוּד לוֹמַר "וְאֶת נֶפֶשׁ אוֹיְבְךָ יַקְלִיעֶנָּה בְּתוֹךְ כַּף הַקַּלַּע".
Among the wicked, it is taught to say: "And your enemy's soul shall be cast into the sling's cup."

בְּמִדְרָשׁ תְּהִלִּים אָמְרוּ "יַעַלְזוּ חֲסִידִים בִּכְבוֹד" בְּאֵיזֶה כָּבוֹד עוֹשֶׂה לַצַּדִּיקִים בְּשָׁעָה שֶׁנִּפְטָרִין מִן הָעוֹלָם וְהֵן מְקַלְּסִין
In the Midrash of Psalms they said, "The righteous rejoice in glory." In what glory does He do for the righteous when they depart from the world, and they praise?

לְהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא שֶׁשָּׂם אוֹתָן בְּצִרּוּר הַחַיִּים שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדוֹנִי צְרוּרָה בְּצִרּוּר הַחַיִּים" וּבְמִדְרָשׁ שִׁיר
To the Holy One, blessed be He, who placed them in the bundle of life, as it is said, "And the soul of my lord shall be bound up in the bundle of life," and in the Midrash of Song.

הַשִּׁירִים (זוּטָא ע יד) אָמְרוּ "תּוֹכוֹ רָצוּף אַהֲבָה" אֵלּוּ נְפָשׁוֹת הַצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁנְּתוּנוֹת עִמּוֹ בַּמָּרוֹם שְׁלוֹשָׁה נִכְנְסוּ
The songs (Zuta E Yad) said "His interior is filled with love" these are the souls of the righteous that are with Him in the heights; three entered.

זֶה לִפְנִים מִזֶּה מֹשֶׁה נָגַשׁ אֶל הָעֲרָפֶל לִפְנִים מִמֶּנּוּ צֶדֶק וּמִשְׁפָּט שֶׁכֵּן כָּתוּב "צֶדֶק וּמִשְׁפָּט מְכוֹן כִּסְאֶךָ"
This is before that; Moses approached the cloud before him, and justice and righteousness are written, "Justice and righteousness are the foundation of your throne."

לִפְנִים מֵהֶם נְפָשׁוֹת הַצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדוֹ נֶפֶשׁ כׇּל חַי" וְאוֹמֵר "וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדוֹנִי צְרוּרָה בְּצְרוֹר הַחַיִּים"
Before them are the souls of the righteous, as it is said, "In whose hand is the soul of every living thing," and it says, "And my lord's soul is bound up in the bundle of life."

וְהוּא הָרָמוּז בַּתּוֹרָה "וְלִדְבֹּקָה בּוֹ" וְעוֹד נְדַבֵּר בָּזֶה לְפָנֵינוּ בְּעֶזְרַת הָאֵל.
And it is hinted at in the Torah "and to cleave to Him", and we will speak further about this before us with the help of God.

אֲבָל עוֹד יַאֲמִינוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה לְפִי דְּבָרֵיהֶם בַּהַגָּדוֹת שֶׁאָמְרוּ הַגַּן עֵדֶן הַתַּחְתּוֹן שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּהוּ יֵשׁ לִשְׂכָר
But our sages, may their memory be blessed, will still believe according to their words in the legends that they said about the lower Garden of Eden that we mentioned, there is a reward.

הַנְּשָׁמוֹת בּוֹ חֵלֶק בְּשָׂכָר וְעֹנֶג וְאַף עַל פִּי שֶׁאֵינָן גּוּף וְכִבְרָ שָׂמוּ לָהֶם מָקוֹם עִם הָעֶלְיוֹנִים
The souls have a share in reward and pleasure, and even though they are not a body, they have already been assigned a place among the upper ones.

וְתִקּוּן הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה כָּךְ הוּא לְפִי שֶׁאָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (שַׁבָּת קנב ב') עַד שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר
And the correction of this matter is thus because the sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Shabbat 152b) until twelve.

חָדָשׁ גּוּפוֹ קַיָּם וְנִשְׁמָתוֹ עוֹלָה וְיוֹרֶדֶת לְאַחַר שְׁנַיִם עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ גּוּפוֹ בָּטֵל וְנִשְׁמָתוֹ עוֹלָה וְשׁוּב אֵינָהּ
When his body is still alive and his soul ascends and descends after twelve months, his body is nullified and his soul ascends and again it is not.

עֲשָׂרָה יוֹרֶדֶת וּפֵרוּשׁ הַקַּבָּלָה הַזֹּאת כִּי כׇּל שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ עֲדַיִן כּוֹחַ הַגּוּף קַיָּם וְהַנְּשָׁמָה נוֹטָה
Ten descends and the interpretation of this kabbalah is that for all twelve months the strength of the body still exists and the soul inclines.

לְדַעְתָּה וּלְמַעֲשֶׂיהָ כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיְתָה בְּאֶמְנָה אִתּוֹ בְּהִצְטַיְּרוּת מַחְשָׁבוֹת גַּשְׁמִיּוֹת וְאַף עַל פִּי שֶׁעוֹלָה לִידִיעַת עוֹלָם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת
According to her knowledge and deeds, as she was in her covenant with Him in the depiction of material thoughts, and even though she ascends to the knowledge of the world of souls.

יוֹרֶדֶת הִיא לְעִנְיָן שֶׁהָיְתָה כְּבָר לְאַחַר שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ נִתְעַלְּתָה מִדֵּעוֹת גַּשְׁמִיּוֹת וְלָבְשָׁה מְלָכוֹת וְנִתְעַטְּרָה בַּעֲטֶרָה
She descends to the matter that she was already after twelve months, having risen above material thoughts, and she clothed herself in kingdoms and was crowned with a crown.

שֶׁלְּעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאֵין הַכַּוָּנָה בְּמָה שֶׁאָמְרוּ גּוּפוֹ קַיָּם בֵּין שֶׁיִּהְיֶה הַגּוּף נִשְׂרָף לְסִיד אוֹ שֶׁיִּהְיֶה מִן
For the world to come, and the intention is not in what they said that his body remains, whether the body is burned to ashes or whether it is from...

הַחֲנוּטִים שֶׁגּוּפָם מִתְקַיֵּם אֶלָּא הַכַּוָּנָה לְמָה שֶׁכָּתַבְנוּ וּבְאוֹתָן י"ב חֹדֶשׁ חֵלֶק הַנְּשָׁמָה בְּגַן עֵדֶן לִהְיוֹת עֹנֶג
The embalmed ones whose bodies are preserved, but the intention is to what we wrote, and in those twelve months the soul's share in the Garden of Eden is to be pleasure.

הָעוֹלָם הָעֶלְיוֹן לָהֶם בָּעִנְיָן נוֹטֶה לְגַשְׁמִיּוּת וְאֵין כַּוָּנַת רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה שֶׁיִּתְעַדְּנוּ הַנְּשָׁמוֹת בְּפֵרוֹת הַגַּן הַהוּא
The upper world is inclined toward materiality in their matter, and it is not the intention of our sages, may their memory be blessed, that the souls should delight in the fruits of that garden.

אוֹ שֶׁיִּרְחֲצוּ בַּנְּהָרוֹת אֶלָּא הַכַּוָּנָה מִפְּנֵי שֶׁהוּא שַׁעַר הַשָּׁמַיִם לָאוֹר בְּאוֹר הַחַיִּים כַּאֲשֶׁר תֹּאמַר עַל הָעוֹמֵד
Or that they should bathe in the rivers, but the intention is because it is the gate of heaven to the light in the light of life, as you would say about the standing one.

בִּירוּשָׁלַיִם שֶׁתִּתְלַבֵּשׁ נַפְשׁוֹ רוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ וּמְלָאכוֹת נְבוּאָה בְּחֶפֶץ עֶלְיוֹן בֵּין בְּמַרְאֶה בֵּין בְּחֲלוֹם יוֹתֵר מִן הָעוֹמְדִים
In Jerusalem, that his soul will be clothed with the spirit of holiness and the works of prophecy in the upper will, whether in vision or in dream, more than those who stand.

בָּאָרֶץ טְמֵאָה וּמִן הַהַשָּׂגָה הַהוֹוֶה אֶל הַנֶּפֶשׁ בַּמָּקוֹם הַהוּא מִתְפַּעֶלֶת לְדִבְקוּת הָעוֹלָם הָעֶלְיוֹן וְהַשָּׂגַת תַּעֲנוּג הָרוּחָנִי
In a defiled land and from the apprehension that is present to the soul in that place, it is moved to the attachment of the upper world and the apprehension of spiritual pleasure.

וְזֶה מָה שֶׁמְּסַפְּרִין רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה בַּהַגָּדָה (בָּבָא מְצִיעָא פֶּה ב') בְּצַדִּיקֵי דְּסָלְקִי וְנָחֲתִי לְמַתִּיבְתָּא דְּרָקִיעָא
And this is what our Rabbis of blessed memory tell in the Haggadah (Bava Metzia 59b) about the righteous who ascend and descend to the academy of heaven.

הָעֲלִיָּה הַהִיא הַשִּׂיגַת הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְדִבְקוּתָהּ בָּעֶלְיוֹנִים וְהַיְּרִידָה הִיא לְהַשִּׂיגַת מָה שֶׁיַּגִּיעוּ סְגֻלַּת הַתַּחְתּוֹנִים בְּחַיֵּיהֶן כְּגוֹן הַנְּבִיאִים.
That ascent is the attainment of the soul and its attachment to the upper realms, and the descent is for attaining what the lower ones achieve in their lives, such as the prophets.

אֲבָל הֱיוֹת הַנֶּפֶשׁ נִגְדֶּרֶת בַּמָּקוֹם אִם יִתְקַשֶּׁה לַמִּתְחַכְּמִים עַל תּוֹרַת ה' נָשִׁיב לָהֶם בָּזֶה הָאֶפְשָׁרוּת שֶׁשָּׂמְנוּ
But if the soul is defined in a place and it becomes difficult for those who are wise in the Torah of the Lord, we will answer them with this possibility that we have placed.

לִפְנֵיהֶם בְּחוֹטְאֵי גֵּיהִנֹּם וְאֵי אֶפְשָׁר לְפָרֵשׁ יוֹתֵר מִזֶּה בַּגַּן וְעֵדֶן הָעֶלְיוֹנִים הַנִּזְכָּרִים לְמַעְלָה אֲבָל כַּוָּנָתֵנוּ שֶׁיִּתְבָּאֵר
Before them in the sinners of Gehenna, and it is impossible to interpret more than this in the Garden and the Upper Eden mentioned above, but our intention is that it will be explained.

מִדְּבָרֵינוּ לַתַּלְמִידִים שֶׁאֵין דִּבְרֵי תוֹרָה בְּגַן עֵדֶן וְעָנִינוּ מָשָׁל שֶׁאֵינוֹ אֱמֶת וְאֵין דִּבְרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה
From our words to the students that there are no words of Torah in the Garden of Eden, and we answered with a parable that is not true, and there are no words of our sages, may their memory be blessed.

וְקַבָּלַת הָאָבוֹת נוֹחֵי הַנֶּפֶשׁ בְּאֵלּוּ הָעִנְיָנִים דִּבְרֵי הַבָּאִי אוֹ מָשָׁל בָּטַל הַמְּלִיצָה אֶלָּא הַכֹּל אֱמֶת וֶאֱמוּנָה
And the acceptance of the fathers, the restful of the soul, in these matters is either the words of the coming one or a parable whose rhetoric is nullified, but rather everything is truth and faith.

חִיצוֹן וּפְנִימִי מִן מַעֲלָה לְמַעֲלָה וּמִן רוֹמְמוּת לְרוֹמְמוּת וְזוֹכֶה בּוֹ כׇּל אֶחָד וְאֶחָד לִמְקוֹם מַעֲלָתוֹ וּמַשִּׂיג
External and internal from elevation to elevation and from exaltation to exaltation, and each and every one merits in it a place according to his level and attains.

מִמֶּנּוּ כְּפִי הָרָאוּי לְגַמְּלוֹ וּלְפִיכָךְ אָמְרוּ בְּוַיְקְרָא רַבָּה (כ"ז א') אָמַר רַבִּי אֶלְעָזָר בְּרַבִּי מְנַחֵם "וְנַחַל"
From him as is appropriate to repay him, and therefore they said in Vayikra Rabbah (27:1), Rabbi Elazar son of Rabbi Menachem said, 'and a river'.

עֲדָנְךָ תְּשַׁקֵּם" אֵין כָּתִיב כָּאן אֶלָּא "וְנַחַל עֲדָנֶיךָ" מִכָּאן שֶׁכׇּל צַדִּיק וְצַדִּיק יֵשׁ לוֹ עֵדֶן בִּפְנֵי
"Your Eden will be restored" is not written here, but "and we will inherit your Edens". From here it is clear that every righteous person has an Eden in front of them.

עַצְמוֹ וּבֶאֱמֶת כִּי בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה גַּן עֵדֶן מְשַׁמֵּשׁ עוֹד בְּגִמּוּל גַּשְׁמִי מַמָּשׁ לִזְמַן הַתְּחִיָּה וְהוּא מָה
Himself and truly because in this place the Garden of Eden still serves as a reward of physical reality for the time of resurrection, and it is what?

שֶׁאָמְרוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (תַּעֲנִית ל"א א) עָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לַעֲשׂוֹת סְעוּדָה לַצַּדִּיקִים בְּגַן עֵדֶן
As our Sages of blessed memory said (Ta'anit 31a), the Holy One, blessed be He, will make a feast for the righteous in the Garden of Eden.

וְכֵן אָמְרוּ עָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לַעֲשׂוֹת מָחוֹל לַצַּדִּיקִים בְּגַן עֵדֶן וְהוּא יוֹשֵׁב בֵּינֵיהֶם וְכׇל אֶחָד
And so they said: The Holy One, blessed be He, is destined to make a dance for the righteous in the Garden of Eden, and He sits among them, and each one.

וְאֶחָד מַרְאֶהוּ בְּאֶצְבַּע כְּאִלּוּ רֹהֶן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "הִנֵּה אֱלֹהֵינוּ זֶה" וְזֶה עֹנֶג וְשָׂכָר עָתִיד בִּזְמַן הַתְּחִיָּה וְהַרְאוּת
And one shows him with a finger as if they see him, as it is said, "Behold our God, this is He," and this is pleasure and reward in the future in the time of resurrection and showing.

הַשְּׁכִינָה כְּאִלּוּ מַרְאָה בְּאֶצְבַּע מִתּוֹךְ הַמָּחוֹל הַשְּׂגַת הַמַּעֲלָה וְעֹנֶג הַתַּחְיְדוּת מִתּוֹךְ שִׂמְחָה גּוּפִית כִּי יַגִּיעוּ אַנְשֵׁי
The Shekhinah, as it were, shows with a finger from within the dance, achieving elevation and the pleasure of unity from bodily joy, because people will reach...

הָעוֹלָם הַהוּא לְמַעֲלַת מֹשֶׁה רַבֵּנוּ שֶׁנִּתְעַלְּתָה נַפְשׁוֹ עַל גּוּפוֹ עַד שֶׁבִּטְּלוּ כּוֹחוֹתָיו הַגּוּפִיּוֹת וְהָיָה מְלֻבָּשׁ בְּכֹל
That world for the merit of Moses our teacher, whose soul was elevated over his body until his bodily powers were nullified, and he was clothed in everything.

שָׁעָה בְּרוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ כְּאִלּוּ רָאִיתוֹ וּשְׁמִיעָתוֹ בְּעֵין הַנֶּפֶשׁ בִּלְבַד לֹא בְּמַצְעֵי הָעַיִן הַגּוּפָנִי כַּאֲשֶׁר יַעֲשׂוּ שְׁאָר
An hour in the Holy Spirit as if you saw and heard it in the eye of the soul alone, not in the pupils of the physical eye as others do.

הַנְּבִיאִים בְּהִתְבַּטֵּל הַגּוּף וְהִתְפַּשְּׁטָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ מִכּוֹחוֹתָיו שֶׁיֵּאָצֵל עָלֶיהָ רוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְתִרְאֶה בְּרָאוֹת עַצְמָהּ כַּאֲשֶׁר יִרְאֶה מִיכָאֵל
Prophets, when the body is nullified and the soul spreads from its powers, that the Holy Spirit will descend upon it and it will see in its own visions as Michael sees.

וְגַבְרִיאֵל וְהִיא הָרְאָיָה הָאֲמִתִּית וְהַשְּׁמִיעָה הַנְּכוֹנָה כִּי אֵין לַמִּתְפַּלְסְפִים מְבַטְּלֵי הַתּוֹרָה כְּפִי רְצוֹנָם טַעֲנָה מֻכְרַחַת עָלֵינוּ
And Gabriel, and it is the true proof and the correct hearing that those who deny the Torah according to their will have no compelling argument against us.

שֶׁיְּכַחִישׁוּ אֱמוּנָתֵנוּ שֶׁאֲנַחְנוּ מַאֲמִינִים שֶׁיֵּשׁ לְגַבְרִיאֵל רְאִיָּה אוֹ שְׁמִיעָה וְתִקְרָא אוֹתָהּ "הַשָּׂגָה שֶׁהִיא מַגַּעַת אֵלָיו מִן מִיכָאֵל"
that they will deny our faith that we believe Gabriel has a vision or hearing, and they will call it "a perception that reaches him from Michael".

עַל דֶּרֶךְ מָשָׁל וְכֵן הַנְּשָׁמוֹת מְסַפְּרוֹת זוֹ עִם זוֹ כְּמוֹ שֶׁזָּכְרוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה (בְּרָכוֹת י"ח ב')
As a parable, and similarly the souls tell each other, like our Sages of blessed memory mentioned (Berakhot 18b).

וְאֵין הַכַּוָּנָה לְסִפּוּר בְּשָׂפָה וְחִתּוּךְ לָשׁוֹן אַךְ שֶׁיֵּשׁ הוֹדָעָה וְהַשָּׂגָה לַנְּפָשׁוֹת זוֹ מִזּוֹ וְהִנֵּה יָצָאנוּ מֵעִנְיָנוֹ
And the intention is not for a story in language and cut off speech, but that there is a message and understanding between souls, and behold we have gone out of our matter.

וּבָאנוּ לָגַעַת בְּסוֹדוֹת הַנְּבוּאָה וּרְאָיוֹת הַחֲסִידִים שֶׁרוֹאִין הַמַּלְאָכִים וְאָמְרוּ בָּאַגָּדָה בַּמִּדְרָשׁ "מָה רַב טוּבְךָ אֲשֶׁר צָפַנְתָּ לְיִרְאֶיךָ"
And we came to touch the secrets of prophecy and the proofs of the pious who see angels, and they said in the legend in the Midrash: "How great is your goodness which you have hidden for those who fear you."

וְהִנֵּה כְּבָר נִתְבָּאֲרָה אֱמוּנָתֵנוּ בְּגַן עֵדֶן וְנִרְמְזָה כְּפִי הָרָאוּי.
And behold, our belief in the Garden of Eden has already been clarified and hinted at as appropriate.

וְעַכְשָׁו נַחֲזֹר לִשְׂכַר גָּדוֹל שֶׁהוּא הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהִנֵּה דָּבָר יָדוּעַ הוּא כִּי הַזּוֹכֶה שֶׁבִּדְבָרֵי זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה
And now we will return to the great reward which is the world to come, and behold it is a known thing that the one who wins in the words of their memory, blessings.

הוּא הַמְּזֻמָּן לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהַמִּתְבָּרֵךְ מֵהֶם אוֹמְרִים עָלָיו "זִכְרוֹ לְחַיֵּי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" (קִדּוּשִׁין ל"א ב')
He is the one destined for the life of the world to come, and those who are blessed by them say about him, "His memory is for the life of our many teachers, the world to come" (Kiddushin 31b).

וְעִקַּר הַשָּׂכָר אֶצְלָם בְּכׇל הַמִּצְוֹת הוּא הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ (בְּרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה נט ב) "וַתִּשְׂחַק לְיוֹם אַחֲרוֹן".
And the main reward for them in all the commandments is the World to Come, as they said (Genesis Rabbah 99:2) "And she laughed at the last day".

שֶׁכׇּל שְׂכָרָן שֶׁל מִצְוֹת צַדִּיקִים אֵינוֹ אֶלָּא לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא, וְאָמְרוּ (רֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה טז ב'): 'צַדִּיקִים גְּמוּרִים נִכְתָּבִין'.
That all the reward of the commandments of the righteous is only for the World to Come, and they said (Rosh Hashanah 16b): 'The completely righteous are written'.

וְנֶחְתָּמִין לְאַלָּתָר לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ בַּבְּרִיָּתָא לְמַעְלָה הִנֵּה שְׁמוֹ] שְׂכַר צַדִּיקִים הַגְּמוּרִים וּמַעֲלָתָן לְחַיֵּי
And we are sealed immediately for the life of the world to come, as we mentioned in the baraita above, behold his name] the reward of the perfect righteous and their elevation to life.

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן הָאוֹבְדִים אֶצְלָם הֵם הַשְּׁנוּיִין בְּמִשְׁנָתֵנוּ (סַנְהֶדְרִין פט) וְאֵלּוּ שֶׁאֵין לָהֶם חֵלֶק לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא
The World to Come and likewise those who are lost among them are those who are changed in our Mishnah (Sanhedrin 89) and these who have no portion in the World to Come.

הָאוֹמֵר אֵין תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים מִן הַתּוֹרָה וְאֵין תּוֹרָה מִן הַשָּׁמַיִם וְכוּ' וְזֶה הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא סוֹף
The one who says that there is no resurrection of the dead from the Torah and no Torah from heaven, etc., and this is the world to come which is the end.

מַתַּן שְׂכָרָן שֶׁלַּמִּצְוֹת הַדָּבָר מִסְתַּפֵּק הוּא בְּמִשְׁנָה זוֹ וְלֹא נִתְבָּאֵר בְּפֵרוּשׁ אִם הוּא עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וּשְׂכָרָן
The reward for the commandments is a matter of uncertainty in this Mishnah, and it is not explicitly clarified whether it refers to the world of souls and their reward.

הַמַּגִּיעַ לְכׇל אַחַת מֵהֶן בְּעַצְמָהּ אַחֲרֵי הַמָּוֶת מִיָּד כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ אוֹ הוּא עוֹלָם אַחֵר שֶׁיִּתְחַדֵּשׁ וְיִהְיֶה
That which reaches each of them in herself immediately after death, as we mentioned, or it is another world that will be renewed and will exist.

הַשָּׂכָר בַּגּוּף וּבַנֶּפֶשׁ אוֹ לַנֶּפֶשׁ בִּלְבַד בִּזְמַן הַהוּא הַמִּתְחַדֵּשׁ וְרָאִינוּ שֶׁאָמְרוּ בַּגְּמָרָא עַל הַמִּשְׁנָה הַזּוֹ וְכֹל
The reward in body and soul or for the soul alone at that time which is renewed and we saw that they said in the Gemara about this Mishnah and all.

כָּךְ לָמָּה תַּנָּא הוּא כָּפַר בִּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים לָפִיכָךְ לֹא יְהֵא לוֹ חֵלֶק בִּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים לְפִי שֶׁכֹּל
Thus, why is the tanna denying the resurrection of the dead? Therefore, he will have no part in the resurrection of the dead, because all...

מִדּוֹתָיו שֶׁלַּקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מִדָּה כְּנֶגֶד מִדָּה וְזֶה מוֹרֶה כִּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הוּא עוֹלַם הַשָּׂכָר לְאוֹתָן
The attributes of the Holy One, blessed be He, are measure for measure, and this indicates that the World to Come is a world of reward for those.

שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מְחַיֶּה בִּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וְאֵינָן עַל עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת שֶׁקָּרִינוּ אוֹתוֹ גַּן עֵדֶן אֶלָּא עוֹלָם
that the Holy One, blessed be He, revives in the resurrection of the dead, and they are not on the world of souls that we call it the Garden of Eden, but rather a world.

הַתְּחִיָּה הוּא וְשָׁם (סַנְהֶדְרִין פ"ט) אָמְרוּ אָמַר רַבִּי אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן רַבִּי יוֹסִי בְּדָבָר זֶה זִיַּפְתִּי דְּבָרַי
The revival is he, and there (Sanhedrin 89) they said, Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Yosei said: In this matter I falsified my words.

כּוּתִיִּים שֶׁהָיוּ אוֹמְרִים אֵין תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים מִן הַתּוֹרָה אָמַרְתִּי לָהֶם זִיַּפְתֶּם תּוֹרַתְכֶם וְלֹא הֶעֱלֵיתֶם בְּיַדְכֶם כְּלוּם
Kutians who were saying that there is no resurrection of the dead from the Torah, I said to them, 'You have falsified your Torah and you have not achieved anything.'

שֶׁאַתֶּם אוֹמְרִים אֵין תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים מִן הַתּוֹרָה הֲרֵי הוּא אוֹמֵר "הֲכָרַת תִּכְרֹת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא עֲוֹנָה בָּהּ"
That you say there is no resurrection of the dead from the Torah, for it says, "The soul shall be cut off from the community for its sin."

"הַכֶּרֶת תִּכְרֹת" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "עוֹנָה בָּהּ" לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא מִכָּאן הֶרְאָה לָהֶם תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים שֶׁאִם אֵין תְּחִיַּת
"The cutting off will be cut off" in this world "answers in it" to the next world from here he showed them the resurrection of the dead that if there is no resurrection...

הַמֵּתִים אוֹתוֹ הָעוֹלָם בָּטֵל הוּא וְכִיּוֹן שֶׁחִיְּבָה תוֹרָה לְעוֹבֵד עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה כָּרֵת מֵאוֹתוֹ עוֹלָם נִמְצָא תְּחִיַּת
The dead of that world are null and void, and since the Torah obligated one who worships idolatry to be cut off from that world, it is found that there is a resurrection.

הַמֵּתִים לָמַד מֵאֵלָיו מִן הַתּוֹרָה וְשָׁם הִקְשׁוּ בַּגְּמָרָא אָמַר לוֹ רַב פַּפָּא לְאַבַּיֵּי וְלִימָּא תַּרְוַיְהוּ מִ"הֲכָרַת תִּכָּרֵת"
The dead learned from the Torah on their own, and there they raised a difficulty in the Gemara. Rav Pappa said to Abaye: 'And let them both say from "the one who is cut off shall be cut off"?'

דִּבְּרָה תּוֹרָה כִּלְשׁוֹן בְּנֵי אָדָם וְאָמְרִינַן כְּתַנַּאי "הֲכָרֵת תִּכָּרֵת" "הֲכָרֵת" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "תִּכָּרֵת" בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא דִּבְרֵי
The Torah spoke in the language of human beings, and we say as a tannaitic dispute: 'The one who is cut off will be cut off' – 'cut off' in this world, 'cut off' in the world to come – these are the words.

רַבִּי עֲקִיבָה אָמַר לוֹ רַבִּי אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן עֲזַרְיָה וְהֲלֹא כְּבָר נֶאֱמַר "אֶת ה' הוּא מְגַדֵּף וְנִכְרְתָה"?
Rabbi Akiva said to Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, "And was it not already said, 'He who blasphemes the Lord shall be cut off'?"

וְכִי שְׁלוֹשָׁה עוֹלָמִים יֵשׁ אֶלָּא "הַכֶּרֶת" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְנִכְרַת לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא "הַכֶּרֶת תִּכָּרֵת" דִּבְּרָה תּוֹרָה כְּלָשׁוֹן
And is it that there are three worlds? Rather, "the knowledge" in this world and "cut off" in the next world "the knowledge will be cut off" the Torah spoke in the language of...

בְּנֵי אָדָם לָמַדְנוּ מִכָּאן כִּי הַכֶּרֶת הוּא אַבְדַן הַנֶּפֶשׁ מִן הַגּוּף וְהַכְּרִיתָה מִמֶּנּוּ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְהַכֶּפֶל
Human beings have learned from here that the cutting off is the loss of the soul from the body and its separation from it in this world, and the double.

בְּעִנְשֵׁי עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה לְהִכָּרֵת מִן הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאֵין עוֹלָם שְׁלִישִׁי שֶׁיְּהֵא רָאוּי כָּרֵת כִּי דִּינֵי גֵּיהִנֹּם
In the punishments of idolatry for being cut off from the World to Come, and there is no third world that would be worthy of karet, because the judgments of Gehenna.

בַּנֶּפֶשׁ בִּזְמַן הַזֶּה אֵין בּוֹ הַכֶּרֶתָה כְּלָל וְלֹא יִשָּׂא אֱלֹהִים נֶפֶשׁ וְחָשַׁב מַחְשָׁבוֹת לְבִלְתִּי יִדַּח מִמֶּנּוּ
In the soul at this time there is no recognition of it at all, and God will not bear a soul, and he will think thoughts so that he will not be rejected from him.

נִדַּח אֶלָּא לְאוֹתָן שֶׁאֵינָן עוֹמְדִין בַּדִּין שֶׁנִּכְרָתִין בּוֹ וְאוֹבְדִין שָׁם וְהֵם עַצְמָם מִמָּה הִיא כְּרִיתָתָן מֵחַיֵּי
It is cut off, except for those who are not standing in judgment that are cut off in it and lost there, and they themselves—from what is their cutting off from life?

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא
The World to Come

וְעוֹד אָמְרוּ שָׁם בַּגְּמָרָא (סַנְהֶדְרִין צא ב') מִנַּיִן שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מְחַיֶּה מֵתִים שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְאַתֶּם הַדְּבֵקִים בַּה'".
And they also said there in the Gemara (Sanhedrin 91b) from where do we know that the Holy One, blessed be He, revives the dead? It is said, "And you who cling to the Lord."

אֱלֹהֵיכֶם חַיִּים כֻּלְּכֶם הַיּוֹם" מָה הַיּוֹם כֻּלְּכֶם חַיִּים אַף לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כֻּלְּכֶם חַיִּים וְשָׁם (סַנְהֶדְרִין צ ב')
"Your gods are alive for all of you today; what today all of you are alive, so also for the world to come all of you are alive; and there (in Sanhedrin 92b)."

אָמְרוּ רַב חִסְדָּא רָמִי כְּתִיב "וְחִפְּרָה הַלְּבָנָה וּבֹשָׁה הַחַמָּה" וּכְתִיב "וְהָיָה אוֹר הַלְּבָנָה כְּאוֹר הַחַמָּה" לֹא
They said: Rav Hisda raised a contradiction: It is written "and the moon shall be confounded, and the sun shall be ashamed," and it is written "and the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun." No.

קַשְׁיָא כָּאן בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה, כָּאן בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא, כְּלוֹמַר בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ, וְהִקְשׁוּ לִשְׁמוּאֵל דְּאָמַר אֵין
It is difficult here in this world, here in the next world, i.e., in the next world at the time of the Messiah, and they objected to Shmuel who said "no".

בֵּין הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ אֶלָּא שֶׁעֲבוּד מַלְכֻיּוֹת בִּלְבַד אִידִּי וְאִידִּי לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא לֹא קַשְׁיָא כָּאן
Between this world and the days of the Messiah, except for the servitude of the kingdoms alone; this and that for the world to come is not difficult here.

בְּמַחֲנֵה צַדִּיקִים כָּאן בְּמַחֲנֵה שְׁכִינָה וּבְוַדַּאי הֵם זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה לֹא יְפָרְשׁוּ "אוֹר הַלְּבָנָה כְּאוֹר הַחַמָּה" בָּעוֹלָם
In the camp of the righteous here in the camp of the Shekhinah, and surely they, whose memory is for a blessing, will not interpret "the light of the moon as the light of the sun" in the world.

הַנְּשָׁמוֹת אֶלָּא קָרְאוּ הַזְּמַן שֶׁהוּא אַחַר תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים "עוֹלָם הַבָּא" וְכֵן אָמְרוּ בְּדוֹר הַמִּדְבָּר בָּאִין הֵן
The souls, but they called the time that is after the resurrection of the dead "the world to come," and they also said in the generation of the desert that they are coming.

לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וּפְדוּיֵי ה' יָשׁוּבוּן וּבָאוּ צִיּוֹן בְּרִנָּה" וּבַעֲשֶׂרֶת הַשְּׁבָטִים שָׁנוּ עֲשֶׂרֶת הַשְּׁבָטִים אֵין עֲתִידִין
For the world to come, as it is said, "And the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with joy," and concerning the Ten Tribes, the Ten Tribes are not destined.

לחזור ותניא רבי אומר באין הן לעולם הבא שנאמר "והיה ביום ההוא יתקע בשופר גדול ובאו


הָאוֹבְדִים בְּאֶרֶץ אַשּׁוּר וְהַנִּדָּחִים בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַה' בְּהַר הַקֹּדֶשׁ בִּירוּשָׁלַיִם" וְזֶה הָעִנְיָן אֵינוֹ בְּעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת
Those who are lost in the land of Assyria and those who are scattered in the land of Egypt and they bowed down to the Lord on the holy mountain in Jerusalem, and this matter is not in the world of souls.

וְשָׁם (סַנְהֶדְרִין צא ב') אָמַר רַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֶּן לֵוִי מִנַּיִן לִתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים מִן הַתּוֹרָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "אַשְׁרֵי".
And there (Sanhedrin 91b) Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: From where in the Torah do we have evidence of the resurrection of the dead? It is said, 'Happy is he...'

יוֹשְׁבֵי בֵּיתְךָ עוֹד יְהַלְּלוּךָ סֶלָה "הַלְּלוּךָ" לֹא נֶאֱמַר אֶלָּא "יְהַלְּלוּךָ" מִכָּאן לִתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים מִן הַתּוֹרָה וְאָמַר
"Those who dwell in Your house will still praise You, Selah. 'Praise You' is not said but 'They will praise You.' From here we have evidence of the resurrection of the dead from the Torah, and it is said..."

רַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֶּן לֵוִי כׇּל הָאוֹמֵר שִׁירָה בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה זוֹכֶה וְאוֹמְרָהּ לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "אַשְׁרֵי יוֹשְׁבֵי
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Anyone who sings a song in this world will merit to sing it in the World to Come, as it is said, "Happy are those who dwell..."

בֵּיתְךָ עוֹד יְהַלְּלוּךָ סֶלָה" הִנֵּה אֵלּוּ שְׁתֵּי מִמְרוֹת שֶׁתֵּיהֶן לְרַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֶּן לֵוִי וְעִנְיָן אֶחָד בָּהֶן
"Your house will still praise you, Selah. Behold, these are two sayings, both to Rabbi Joshua ben Levi, and one matter in them."

בְּבֵאוּר וְקוֹרֵא עוֹלָם שֶׁאַחֲרֵי תְּחִיָּה "עוֹלָם הַבָּא" וְשָׁם אָמְרוּ כׇּל פַּרְנָס שֶׁמַּנְהִיג אֶת הַצִּבּוּר בְּנַחַת בָּעוֹלָם
In the explanation and reading of the world after resurrection, "the world to come," and there they said that any leader who guides the community gently in the world.

הַזֶּה זוֹכֶה וּמַנְהִיגָן לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וּבְמַסֶּכֶת שַׁבָּת (סג א') אָמְרוּ לְעִנְיַן הַיּוֹצֵא בִּכְלֵי זַיִן בְּשַׁבָּת רַבִּי
This one wins and leads them to the world to come, and in the tractate of Shabbat (Sag A) they said concerning the one who goes out with weapons on Shabbat, Rabbi.

אֱלִיעֶזֶר אוֹמֵר תַּכְשִׁיטִין הֵם לוֹ וְאָמְרוּ לֵיהּ וְכִי מֵאַחַר דְּתַכְשִׁיטִין הֵן לוֹ מִפְּנֵי מָה הֵן בְּטֵלִין
Eliezer says: 'These are ornaments for him,' and they said to him: 'Since these are ornaments for him, why are they nullified?'

לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ מִפְּנֵי שֶׁאֵינָן צְרִיכִין שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "לֹא יִשָּׂא גּוֹי אֶל גּוֹי חֶרֶב וְלֹא יִלְמְדוּ עוֹד מִלְחָמָה".
For the days of the Messiah, because they do not need it, as it is said: "A nation shall not lift up a sword against another nation, and they shall no longer learn war."

וְהִקְשׁוּ מִזֶּה וּפְלִיגָא דִּשְׁמוּאֵל דְּאָמַר שְׁמוּאֵל אֵין בֵּין הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ אֶלָּא שִׁעְבּוּד מַלְכִיּוֹת בִּלְבַד
And they objected from this, and it conflicts with the statement of Samuel, who said: Samuel said that there is nothing between this world and the days of the Messiah except the subjugation of kingdoms alone.

וְאָמְרוּ לָשׁוֹן אַחֵר אָמַר לָהֶם רַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר אַף לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ אֵינוֹ בְּטֵלִין אֲבָל בְּטֵלִין הֵן לָעוֹלָם
And they said, "Another language said to them, Rabbi Eliezer, even for the days of the Messiah it is not nullified, but it is nullified forever."

הַבָּא וְהַיֵּנוּ דִּשְׁמוּאֵל הִפְרִישׁוּ בְּכָאן בֵּין יָמֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ וּבֵין הָעוֹלָם הָעָתִיד וְהוּא לְאַחַר הַתְּחִיָּה שֶׁאֵין כֹּל
The coming one, and it is of Samuel, they separated here between the days of the Messiah and between the future world, and it is after the resurrection that there is none of all.

אֵלּוּ הָעִנְיָנִים עַל עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת הַהֹוֶה וּבְסוֹף חֻלִּין שָׁנוּ בַּבְּרַיְתָא שֶׁהֻזְכְּרָה גַּם כֵּן בְּקִדּוּשִׁין (לט ב')
These are the matters about the world of souls that exists, and at the end of Chullin they taught in a baraita that was also mentioned in Kiddushin (39b).

וּבְמָקוֹמוֹת אֲחֵרִים תַּנְיָא רַבִּי יַעֲקֹב אוֹמֵר אֵין לְךָ כׇּל מִצְוָה וּמִצְוָה שֶׁבַּתּוֹרָה שֶׁמַּתַּן שְׂכָרָהּ בְּצִדָּהּ שֶׁאֵין
And in other places it is taught: Rabbi Yaakov says: There is no commandment in the Torah whose reward is not attached to it.

תחיית המתים תלויה בה שנאמר "למען ייטב לך והארכת ימים" "למען ייטב לך" לעולם שכולו טוב


"וְהַאֲרַכְתָּ יָמִים" בְּעוֹלָם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ אָרֹךְ הִנֵּה זֶה הָעוֹלָם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ טוֹב וְאָרֹךְ שֶׁהוּא הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אָמַר שֶׁתְּחִיַּת
"And you will lengthen days" in a world that is all long, behold this world that is all good and long, which is the world to come, said that resurrection.

הַמֵּתִים תָּלוּי בָּהּ מִפְּנֵי שֶׁהוּא בָּא אַחַר הַתְּחִיָּה וּבְסִפְרֵי (וְאֶתְחַנֵּן לָהּ) הִזְכִּירוּ כׇּל הַזְּמַנִּים הַלָּלוּ בַּמִּדְרָשׁ
The dead are dependent on it because it comes after the resurrection, and in Sifrei (and I will plead with her) they mentioned all these times in the Midrash.

אָמְרוּ "בְּהִתְהַלְּכֶךָ תַּנְחֶה אוֹתְךָ" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "בְּשִׁכְבְּךָ תִּשְׁמֹר" בְּשָׁעָה מִיתָה "וְהַקִּיצוֹת" בִּימֵי הַמָּשִׁיחַ "הִיא תְּשִׂיחֶךָ" לְעוֹלָם
They said: 'When you walk, He will guide you' in this world; 'When you lie down, He will guard you' at the time of death; 'When you awaken' in the days of the Messiah; 'She will converse with you' for eternity.

הַבָּא הִזְכִּירוּ כָּאן הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וּזְמַן הַמִּיתָה וְהוּא עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ וְאַחַר כָּךְ עוֹלָם הַבָּא
The coming [one] mentioned here the world of this and the time of death and it is the world of souls and the days of the Messiah and after that the world to come.

וְאָמְרוּ שָׁם (סִפְרֵי עֵקֶב מ"ז) "לְמַעַן יַרְבּוּ יָמֶיכָה" בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "וִימֵי בָּנֶיךָ" לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ "כִּימֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם".
And they said there (Sifrei Ekev 47), “so that your days may be many” in this world, “and the days of your children” in the days of the Messiah, “as the days of the heavens.”

עַל הָאָרֶץ לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן דָּרְשׁוּ שָׁם (סִפְרֵי נָשָׂא מ) "וְיִשְׁמֹרְךָ" יִשְׁמֹר אֶת נַפְשְׁךָ בִּשְׁעַת מִיתָה
"On the earth" to the world to come, and they also expounded there (Sifrei Naso M) "and He will guard you" He will guard your soul at the time of death.

וְכֵן הוּא אוֹמֵר "וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדוֹנִי צְרוּרָה בְּצִרּוּר הַחַיִּים" דָּבָר אַחֵר יִשְׁמֹר רַגְלֶיךָ מִגֵּיהִנֹּם וְכֵן הוּא
And so he says, "And the soul of my lord shall be bound up in the bundle of life." Another thing: He will keep your feet from Gehenna, and so it is.

אֹמֶר "רַגְלֵי חֲסִידָיו יִשְׁמֹר" דָּבָר אַחֵר "וְיִשְׁמְרֶךָ" יִשְׁמֹר לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן הוּא אוֹמֵר "וְקוֹי ה' יַחְלִיפוּ כּוֹחַ"
He says, "He will guard the feet of His pious ones." Another thing: "And He will guard you" – He will guard you in the World to Come. And so He says, "Those who wait for the Lord will renew their strength."

הַזְכִּירוּ בְּכָאן שְׁמִירַת הַנֶּפֶשׁ בִּשְׁעַת מִיתָה שֶׁהוּא עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וְהִדָּבְקוּת בְּצְרוֹר הַחַיִּים שֶׁהוּא גַּן עֵדֶן שֶׁלָּהּ
Mention here the preservation of the soul at the time of death, which is the world of souls, and the attachment to the bundle of life, which is her Garden of Eden.

כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ וְאַחֲרֵי כֵן שְׁמִירָתָהּ לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְשָׁם שָׁנִינוּ עוֹד "חוֹפֵף עָלָיו כׇּל הַיּוֹם" "חוֹפֵף עָלָיו"
As we mentioned and after that its preservation for the world to come, and there we also learned 'He who covers him all day' 'He who covers him'

בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה "כׇּל הַיּוֹם" לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ "וּבֵין כְּתֵפָיו שָׁכֵן" בָּנוּי וּמְשֻׁכְלָּל לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכוּ' וְעוֹד אָמְרוּ
In this world, "all day" for the days of the Messiah, "and between his shoulders dwells," is built and perfected for the world to come, etc., and they also said.

שֵׁם (סִפְרֵי בְּרָכָה שֶׁנֶּד) "כִּי שֶׁפַע יָמִים יִינְקוּ" זֶה יַמָּה שֶׁל חֵיפָה שֶׁגָּנוּז לַצַּדִּיקִים לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא
There (Sifrei Bרכה Shend) "for the abundance of days they will suck" this is the sea of Haifa that is hidden for the righteous in the world to come.

מִנַּיִן אַתָּה אוֹמֵר שֶׁכֹּל סְפִינוֹת שֶׁאוֹבְדוֹת בַּיָּם הַגָּדוֹל וְצָרוּר שֶׁלְּכֶסֶף וְזָהָב וְאַבְנִים טוֹבוֹת וּמַרְגָּלִיּוֹת וּזְכוּכִיּוֹת וְכֹל
From where do you say that all ships that are lost in the great sea, and a bundle of silver and gold and good stones and pearls and glass, and all?

כְּלֵי חֶמְדָּה שֶׁהַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל מְקִיאָן לְיַמָּה שֶׁל חֵיפָה שֶׁגָּנוּז לַצַּדִּיקִים לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא תַּלְמוּד לוֹמַר "כִּי שֶׁפַע"
Precious vessels that the great sea vomits to the bay of Haifa, that is hidden for the righteous in the future, it is taught to say, 'for abundance'.

יָמִים יִינְקוּ
Days will suck.

מִדְרָשׁ אֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת רַבָּה עֲשָׂרָה דְּבָרִים עָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְחַדֵּשׁ לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הָרִאשׁוֹנָה שֶׁהוּא עָתִיד
The Midrash of these names, Rabbah, says that ten things the Holy One, blessed be He, will renew for the world to come, the first of which is that He will be renewed.

לְהָאִיר לְעוֹלָמוֹ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "לֹא יִהְיֶה לְךָ עוֹד הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ לְאוֹר יוֹמָם" וְגוֹ' וְכִי אָדָם יָכוֹל לְהַבִּיט בַּקָּדוֹשׁ
To illuminate his world that is said, "the sun will no longer be for you as a light of day," etc., and can a person look at the Holy One?

בָּרוּךְ הוּא אֶלָּא מָה הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עוֹשֶׂה לַשֶּׁמֶשׁ מְאוֹר אַרְבָּעִים וְתִשְׁעָה חֶלְקֵי אוֹר שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהָיָה"
Blessed is He, but what does the Holy One, blessed be He, do to the sun, the light of forty-nine parts of light, as it is said, "And it was"?

אֹר הַלְּבָנָה כְּאֹר הַחַמָּה וְאֹר הַחַמָּה יִהְיֶה שִׁבְעָתַיִם" וַאֲפִלּוּ אִם אָדָם חוֹלֶה הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא גּוֹזֵר
"The light of the moon is like the light of the sun, and the light of the sun will be sevenfold," and even if a man is sick, the Holy One, blessed be He, decrees.

לַשֶּׁמֶשׁ וּמַרְפְּאוֹ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְזָרְחָה לָכֶם יִרְאֵי שְׁמִי" וְהַשְּׁנִיָּה מוֹצִיאָה מַיִם חַיִּים מִיְּרוּשָׁלַיִם וּמַרְפְּאָה בָּהֶם כׇּל מִי.
One is for the sun and its healing, as it is said, "And it shall shine for you who fear My name," and the second brings forth living water from Jerusalem and heals all who drink it.

שֶׁיֵּשׁ בּוֹ מַחֲלָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהָיָה כׇּל נֶפֶשׁ חַיָּה אֲשֶׁר יִשְׂרֹץ" וְאוֹמֵר "וְנִרְפְּאוּ הַמַּיִם" וְהַשְּׁלִישִׁית עוֹשָׂה אִילָנוֹת
that there is a disease in it, as it is said, "and there was every living creature that swarmed," and says, "and the waters were healed," and the third makes trees.

לִתֵּן פֵּרוֹתֵיהֶן בְּכׇל חֹדֶשׁ וְחֹדֶשׁ וְיִהְיֶה אָדָם אוֹכֵל מֵהֶם וּמִתְרַפֵּא שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהַנַּחַל יַעֲלֶה מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה כֹּל".
To give their fruits in every month and month, and for a person to eat from them and be healed, as it is said, "And the stream will rise from this and that all."

עֵץ מַאֲכָל לְחַדְשָׁיו יִבְכֹּר" הָרְבִיעִית שֶׁהֵם בּוֹנִים כׇּל הַחֻרְבוֹת וְאֵין מָקוֹם חָרֵב בָּעוֹלָם וַאֲפִלּוּ סְדוֹם וַעֲמוֹרָה
A fruit tree for its months will be chosen, the fourth that they build all the ruins, and there is no place desolate in the world, and even Sodom and Gomorrah.

נִבְנוֹת לָעֵתִיד לָבוֹא שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְאַחֹתְךָ סְדוֹם וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ תָּשׁוּבְנָה לְקַדְמוּתָן" הַחֲמִישִׁי שֶׁהוּא יִבְנֶה יְרוּשָׁלַיִם בְּאֶבֶן סַפִּיר שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר
We are building for the future, as it is said, "And your sister Sodom and her daughters shall return to their former state," the fifth one who will build Jerusalem with a sapphire stone, as it is said.

"עֲנִיָּה סוֹעֶרֶת לֹא נוּחֲמָה הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי מַרְבִּיץ בְּפֹךְ אַבְנֶיךָ וְיִסַּדְתִּיךָ בְּסַפִּירִים" וְאוֹתָן הָאֲבָנִים מְאִירוֹת כַּשֶּׁמֶשׁ וְאוּמוֹת
"A poor, storm-tossed one who has not been comforted, behold, I am setting in place the pebbles of your stones and I will found you with sapphires, and those stones shine like the sun and nations."

הָעוֹלָם בָּאִין וְרוֹאִין בִּכְבוֹדָן שֶׁל יִשְׂרָאֵל שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְהָלְכוּ גּוֹיִם לְאוֹרֵךְ וּמְלָכִים לְנוֹגַהּ זָרַחֲךָ" הַשִּׁשִּׁית "וּפָרָה וְדֹב תִּרְעֶינָה"
The world comes and sees the glory of Israel, as it is said: "And nations will go to the light of your rising, and kings to the brightness of your dawn." The sixth: "And a cow and a bear will graze together."

הַשְּׁבִיעִית שֶׁהוּא מֵבִיא כׇּל הַחַיּוֹת וְכׇל הָעוֹפוֹת וְכׇל הָרְמָשִׂים וְכוֹרֵת עִמָּם בְּרִית וְעִם יִשְׂרָאֵל שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְכָרַתִּי"
The seventh, which he brings all the animals and all the birds and all the creeping things and makes a covenant with them, and with Israel, as it is said, "And I will make a covenant with them."

לָהֶם בְּרִית בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא עִם חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה וְעִם עוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וְרֶמֶשׂ הָאָרֶץ" הַשְּׁמִינִי [שֶׁאֵין עוֹד בְּכִי
"To them a covenant in that day with the beast of the field and with the bird of the sky and with the creeping thing of the ground" the eighth [that there is no more weeping].

וִילָלָה בָּעוֹלָם שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "לֹא יִשְׁמַע בָּהּ עוֹד קוֹל בְּכִי וְקוֹל זְעָקָה" הַתְּשִׁיעִי שֶׁאֵין עוֹד מָוֶת שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר
Wailing in the world that is said "no more will be heard in it the sound of weeping and wailing" the ninth where there is no more death that is said.

"בלע המות לנצח" העשירי שאין עוד לא אנחה ולא אנקה ולא יגון אלא הכל שמחין שנאמר


"וּפְדוּיֵי ה' יָשׁוּבוּן וּבָאוּ צִיּוֹן בְּרִנָּה" עַד כָּאן דִּבְרֵי אַגָּדָה זוֹ וּבְאַלְפָא בֵּיתָא דְּרַבִּי עֲקִיבָּה אָמְרוּ
"And the redeemed of the Lord will return, and they will come to Zion with joy." Up to here are the words of this aggadah, and in the alphabet of Rabbi Akiva they said.

"ארץ החיים" ארץ שמתיה חיים תחילה לעולם הבא אם כן צדיקים שבחוצה לארץ כגון משה ואהרן


הָאֵיךְ הֵן חַיִּין וּבָאִין לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא מְלַמֵּד שֶׁבִּשְׁעַת תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וְכוּ'.
How are they alive and come to the world to come? It teaches that at the time of the resurrection of the dead, etc.

כׇּל אֵלּוּ דְּבָרִים בְּרוּרִים שֶׁהָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הָאָמוּר בְּכׇל מָקוֹם אֵינוֹ עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וְהַשָּׂכָר הַמַּגִּיעַ לָהֶם מִיָּד
All these are clear things that the world to come mentioned in every place is not the world of souls and the reward that comes to them immediately.

אַחֲרֵי הַמִּיתָה אֶלָּא עוֹלָם שֶׁעָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְחַדְּשׁוֹ לְאַחַר יְמוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ וּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וּבְבֵרֵשִׁית רַבָּה
After death, but rather the world that the Holy One, blessed be He, will renew after the Messianic era and the resurrection of the dead, and in Bereishit Rabbah.

אָמְרוּ כְּשֵׁם שֶׁיְּצִירָתוֹ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כָּךְ יְצִירָתוֹ לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא מָה יְצִירָתוֹ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה מַתְחִיל
They said: just as his creation in this world, so his creation in the world to come. What is his creation in this world? It begins...

בְּעוֹר וּבְבָשָׂר וְגוֹמֵר בַּגִּידִים וְהָעֲצָמוֹת כָּךְ לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא מַתְחִיל בְּעוֹר וּבְבָשָׂר וְגוֹמֵר בַּגִּידִים וְהָעֲצָמוֹת וּבַגְּמָרָא בְּפֶרֶק
In skin and flesh and finishes with tendons and bones, so too in the future it begins with skin and flesh and finishes with tendons and bones, and in the Gemara in the chapter.

אֵין נֶעֱרָכִין (עֲרָכִין יג ב') [אָמְרוּ] לְמֵימְרָא דְּנָבֶל לְחוּד וְכִנּוֹר לְחוּד דְּלָא כְּרַבִּי יְהוּדָה דְּתַנְיָא רַבִּי
One does not evaluate (Erkin 13b) [they said] to say that a harp alone and a lyre alone is not as R. Judah that it was taught R.

יְהוּדָה אוֹמֵר כִּנּוֹר שֶׁלַּמִּקְדָּשׁ שֶׁלְּשֶׁבַע נִימִין הָיָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "שׂוֹבַע שְׂמָחוֹת אֶת פָּנֶיךָ" אַל תִּקְרָא שׂוֹבַע אֶלָּא
Judah says: The harp of the Temple had seven strings, as it is said, "Satisfaction of joys upon your face" - do not read "satisfaction" but rather...

שֶׁבַע שְׁלֵמוּת הַמָּשִׁיחַ שְׁמוֹנָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "לַמְּנַצֵּחַ עַל הַשְּׁמִינִית" שֶׁלְּעוֹלָם הַבָּא עֶשֶׂר שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "עָלַי עֲשׂוּר וְעָלַי נָבֶל"
Seven perfections of the Messiah; eight, as it is said "For the conqueror over the eighth"; in the world to come ten, as it is said "Upon me ten and upon me a harp."

עָלַי הֲגִיּוֹן בְּכִנּוֹר" וְאוֹמֵר "הוֹדוּ לַה' בְּכִנּוֹר בְּנָבֶל עָשׂוֹר זַמְּרוּ לוֹ" וּמְתַרְצִינָן אֲפִלּוּ תֵּימָא רַבִּי יְהוּדָה
"On me is the reasoning of the harp," and he says, "Give thanks to the Lord with the harp, with the lyre and with the ten-stringed instrument, sing to Him," and we answer, even if you say Rabbi Judah.

לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא אִיְּדִי דְּנַפִּישִׁי נִימִין דִּידֵיהּ נַפִּישׁ קָלֵיהּ כִּנּוֹר וּפֵרוּשׁ הָעִנְיָן הַזֶּה כִּי הַכִּנּוֹר וּכְלֵי הַזֶּמֶר
For the world to come, because his strings are many, his sound is great like a harp. And the meaning of this is that the harp and musical instruments...

שֶׁבַּמִּקְדָּשׁ רֶמֶז לְהַשָּׂגַת הַמַּחְשָׁבָה שֶׁהִיא נִתְלֵית בָּרוּחַ וְאֵין בַּגַּשְׁמִיּוּת דַּק כְּמוּסִיקָא כְּעִנְיָן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְקוֹל וְדִבּוּר וְרוּחַ"
That in the Temple there is a hint of the attainment of thought, which is dependent on the spirit, and there is nothing in corporeality as fine as music, as in the matter that is said 'and a voice and speech and spirit'.

וְזֶהוּ רוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְהִנֵּה [בָּעוֹלָם] הַזֶּה יַשִּׂיגוּ הַחׇכְמָה בְּרוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ שֶׁבַע סְפִירוֹת וְיִדְבַּק אוֹרָן בַּמִּשְׁכָּן וּבַמִּקְדָּשׁ
And this is the Holy Spirit, and behold, in this world they will attain wisdom in the Holy Spirit of the seven sefirot, and their light will adhere to the Tabernacle and the Temple.

וְנִרְמָזוֹת בְּשֶׁבַע נֵרוֹת שֶׁלְּבֵית הַמִּקְדָּשׁ וּבְקֶצֶת הַקׇּרְבָּנוֹת גַּם בִּלְעָם אָמַר "אֶת שִׁבְעַת הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת עָרַכְתִּי" הִזְכִּיר אוֹתָן
And they are hinted at in the seven lamps of the Temple and in some of the sacrifices, and also Balaam said, "I have arranged the seven altars," and he mentioned them.

בְּשֵׁם הַיְּדִיעָה לְפִיכָךְ יִרְמֹז בַּכִּנּוֹר שֶׁבַע כְּלֵי הַקּוֹל בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וּלְיָמֵי הַמָּשִׁיחַ תֻּשַּׂג סְפִירָה שְׁמִינִית וְיִרְמֹז
In the name of knowledge, therefore he will hint with the violin about the seven instruments of sound in this world, and in the days of the Messiah an eighth count will be attained, and he will hint.

אֹתָהּ [וּלְעוֹלָם הַבָּא תִּהְיֶה הַהַשָּׂגָה שְׁלֵמָה לַעֲשָׂרָה סְפִירוֹת וְיִרְמֹז אוֹתָן] וְזֶה עִנְיָן מֻפְלָא וּנְכָבָד וּמִכׇּל מָקוֹם
It [and in the next world the attainment will be complete for the ten sefirot and will allude to them] and this is a wonderful and noble matter, and in any case.

נִלְמַד בְּפֵרוּשׁ הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא עוֹלַם גּוּף וּמִקְדָּשׁ וְכֵלָיו וְאֵינוֹ עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת שֶׁכׇּל אָדָם יֵשׁ לוֹ
We learn in the explanation of the next world that it is a world of body and temple and its vessels, and it is not the world of souls that every person has.

בּוֹ כְּחֵלֶק הָרָאוּי לוֹ אַחַר מִיתָתוֹ מִיָּד וְדָבָר פָּשׁוּט הוּא כָּתוּב בַּתַּלְמוּד שֶׁתִּמְצָא בּוֹ בִּמְקוֹמוֹת רַבִּים
In it as part of what is due to him after his death immediately, and a simple matter is written in the Talmud that you will find in many places.

שֶׁהֵם מַזְכִּירִים רְשָׁעִים בְּגֵיהִנּוֹם כְּמוֹ טִיטוּס וּשְׁאַר רְשָׁעִים כְּגוֹן עֲדַת קוֹרַח וְזוּלָתָם שֶׁבִּזְמַן הַזֶּה הֵם נִדּוֹנִין
that they mention the wicked in Gehenna, such as Titus and other wicked people, such as the congregation of Korach and others, who at this time are being punished.

שָׁם וּמַזְכִּירִין לַצַּדִּיקִים שֶׁהֵם בְּגַן עֵדֶן כְּגוֹן לְרַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֶּן לֵוִי וְרַבִּי שִׁמְעוֹן בֶּן יוֹחַאי וְזוּלָתָם
There and they mention the righteous who are in the Garden of Eden, such as Rabbi Joshua ben Levi and Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai and others.

וְלֹא תִּמְצָא בְּשׁוּם מָקוֹם בַּתַּלְמוּד שֶׁיֹּאמְרוּ עַל אֶחָד מֵהֶן שֶׁהוּא בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא עַכְשָׁו אֶלָּא אוֹמְרִים "מְזֻמָּן"
You will not find anywhere in the Talmud that they say about any of them that he is in the World to Come now, but rather they say "reserved."

לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאָמְרוּ בְּסִפְרֵי (נִצָּבִים)
To the life of the world to come, and they said in the books of (Nitzavim).

במשה רבנו "גנזו לחיי העולם הבא" לא שהוא עכשיו בחיי העולם הבא ואמרו (ברכות סא ב')


בְּרַבִּי עֲקִיבָה בְּמִיתָתוֹ "אַשְׁרֵיךָ רַבִּי עֲקִיבָה שֶׁיָּצְאָה נִשְׁמָתְךָ בְּאֶחָד וְאַתָּה מְזֻמָּן לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" וְאָמְרוּ בְּרַבִּי
In Rabbi Akiva's death, "Blessed are you, Rabbi Akiva, that your soul left in one and you are invited to the life of the world to come," and they said about Rabbi.

אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן דּוֹרְדִּיָּא וּבַקְטִיעָא בֶּן שָׁלוֹם "מְזֻמָּן לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" בְּפֶרֶק רִאשׁוֹן דְּעֲבוֹדָה זָרָה (עֲבוֹדָה זָרָה)
Elazar ben Dordia and Baktia ben Shalom are "invited to the life of the world to come" in the first chapter of Avodah Zarah (Avodah Zarah).

י ב' יז א') וְכֵן בִּמְקוֹמוֹת רַבִּים מְאוֹד בַּתַּלְמוּד הֲרֵי שֶׁלְּאַחַר פְּטִירָתָן שֶׁל צַדִּיקִים אוֹמְרִים שֶׁהֵם מְזֻמָּנִים
And in many places in the Talmud, it is said that after the death of the righteous, they are prepared (or ready).

לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא לְשׁוֹן עָתִיד לָהֶם לְמִדַּת שֶׁפְּטִירָתָן מִן הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה לְגַן עֵדֶן הִיא שֶׁהוּא
For the life of the next world, which is a future language for them, for the measure of their death from this world to the Garden of Eden, it is that he is.

עוֹלָם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וְאֵין פְּטִירָתָן לְעוֹלָם הַקָּרוּי עוֹלָם הַבָּא אֶלָּא שֶׁהֵם מְזֻמָּנִים וְעֲתִידִין לוֹ וְעוֹד אָמְרוּ (בְּרָכוֹת
The world of souls and their departure is not to the world called the World to Come, but rather they are prepared and destined for it. And they also said (in Bרכות).

נֹחַ ב') בִּבְרָכָה דְּרוֹאָה קִבְרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל "וְהֵמִית אֶתְכֶם בְּדִין וְהוּא עָתִיד לְהָקִים אֶתְכֶם לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא"
Noach 2) In the blessing of seeing the graves of Israel: 'And He will kill you in judgment, and He is destined to raise you up to the life of the world to come.'

בְּאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל מְחַיֶּה הַמֵּתִים" [וְשָׁגוּר בְּפִי הַדּוֹרוֹת לוֹמַר בֵּין בַּבַּקָּשָׁה בֵּין בְּסוֹף בִּרְכַּת הַמָּזוֹן וּבְכׇל תְּפִלּוֹת
In the Land of Israel, revives the dead" [and it is customary in the mouths of the generations to say between in the request and at the end of the blessing of the meal and in all prayers].

הָרַחְמָן יְזַכֶּנּוּ וְיִקְרַבְנוּ לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ וּלְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" מַקְדִּימִין יְמוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ וְאֵין דַּעְתָּם לְבַקֵּשׁ שֶׁתִּתְקָרֵב לָהֶם
"May the Merciful One remember us and bring us close to the days of the Messiah and to the life of the world to come." They anticipate the days of the Messiah and do not intend to ask that it will be brought close to them.

הַמִּיתָה וְיִהְיוּ בָּעוֹלָם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת]
The death and they will be in the world of souls.

וְעוֹד מָצִינוּ מְפֹרָשׁ בַּמִּדְרָשׁ "וַיְבָרֵךְ אֱלֹהִים אֶת יוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי" בֵּרֵךְ הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא אֶת הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁמַּתְחִיל
And furthermore we found explicitly in the Midrash "And God blessed the seventh day" that the Holy One blessed be He blessed the world to come that begins.

בְּאֶלֶף הַשְּׁבִיעִי "וְיַקְדִּישׁ אוֹתוֹ" זִמְּנוּ לְיִשְׂרָאֵל וּמִשְּׁנָה זוֹ הוּא שֶׁשָּׁנִינוּ בְּתָמִיד (ז ד) בַּשְּׁבִיעִי אוֹמֵר מִזְמוֹר
In the seventh thousand, "He sanctified it," they appointed for Israel, and from this Mishnah we have learned in Tamid (7:4) that on the seventh day he says a Psalm.

שִׁיר לְיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא לָעוֹלָם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ שַׁבָּת שֶׁהִיא מְנוּחָה לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָמִים וּבְמֵכִילְתָּא (כִּי תִּשָּׂא א)
Song for the Sabbath day for the future to come to a world that is all Sabbath, which is rest for the life of the worlds, and in the Mechilta (Ki Tissa A).

אָמְרוּ כִּי אֲנִי ה' מְקַדֶּשְׁכֶם לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כְּגוֹן קְדֻשַּׁת שַׁבָּת לָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה נִמְצֵינוּ לָמֵדִין שֶׁהוּא מֵעֵין
They said that I, the Lord, sanctify you for the world to come, like the sanctity of Shabbat for this world. We learn that it is a kind of...

קְדוּשַׁת הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן הוּא אוֹמֵר מִזְמוֹר שִׁיר לְיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת לְיוֹם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ שַׁבָּת וּבְהַגָּדָה שֶׁל רַבִּי עֲקִיבָה
The sanctity of the world to come, and so he says: "A Psalm, a song for the day of Shabbat, for a day that is entirely Shabbat," and in the aggadah of Rabbi Akiva.

אָמְרוּ הַדִּין וּמַלְכוּת בֵּית דָּוִד יִהְיוּ בָּאֶלֶף הַשִּׁשִּׁי הֲרֵי נִתְבָּאֵר שֶׁהָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֵינוֹ עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת אֶלָּא
They said that the judgment and the kingdom of the house of David will be in the sixth millennium; it has been clarified that the world to come is not the world of souls, but ...

עוֹלָם נִבְרָא קַיָּם שֶׁיִּמְצְאוּ בּוֹ אַנְשֵׁי הַתְּחִיָּה בְּגוּף וּבְנֶפֶשׁ.
A world was created that exists so that the people of the resurrection will be found in it in body and soul.

וְעַל זֶה הָעוֹלָם אָמְרוּ בִּבְרָכוֹת (יז א') מַרְגָּלָא בְּפוּמֵיהּ דְּרַב הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֵין בּוֹ לֹא אֲכִילָה
And about this world they said in Berakhot (17a) that a pearl is in the mouth of the rabbi: The world to come has no eating.

וְלֹא שְׁתִיָּה וְלֹא קִנְאָה וְלֹא שִׂנְאָה וְלֹא תַּחֲרוּת אֶלָּא צַדִּיקִים יוֹשְׁבִים וַעֲטָרוֹתֵיהֶן בְּרָאשֵׁיהֶן וְהֵן נֶהֱנִין מִזִּיו
And there is no thirst, nor jealousy, nor hatred, nor rivalry, but rather the righteous sit with crowns on their heads, and they enjoy the divine radiance.

שְׁכִינָה וְכֵן יֹאמְרוּ תָּמִיד בַּתַּלְמוּד (עִי' בָּבָא בַּתְרָא י' א') הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא מְשַׁבִּיעָן [מִזִּיו] שְׁכִינָתוֹ
Shekhinah, and so they will say always in the Talmud (see Bava Batra 10a) that the Holy One, blessed be He, swears them [from the radiance] of His Shekhinah.

לְעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "אַשְׂבִּיעָה בְּהֵקִיץ תְּמוּנָתְךָ" רְצוֹנוֹ לוֹמַר שֶׁקִּיּוּם הָאֲנָשִׁים הַזּוֹכִים הַהֵם בְּזִיו הַכָּבוֹד כְּקִיּוּם הַנֶּפֶשׁ
For the next world, as it is said, "I will satisfy in waking up your image," meaning that the existence of those people who are the winners in the glory of honor is like the existence of the soul.

בַּגּוּף בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בַּאֲכִילָה וּשְׁתִיָּה כְּמוֹ שֶׁכָּתוּב "בְּאוֹר פְּנֵי מֶלֶךְ חַיִּים" וְדָרְשׁוּ בְּאוֹתָהּ שְׁמוֹת רַבָּה "וַיַּחֲזוּ".
In the body in this world in eating and drinking like it is written "In the light of the king's face there is life" and they expounded in that Sh'mot Rabbah "And they saw".

אֶת הָאֱלֹהִים וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיִּשְׁתּוּ" אֲכִילָה וַדַּאיִת דִּכְתִיב "בְּאוֹר פְּנֵי מֶלֶךְ חַיִּים" וְכֵן אוֹמֵר בְּמֹשֶׁה רַבֵּנוּ עָלָיו.
With God they ate and drank; a certain eating, as it is written "in the light of the face of the King of life", and similarly it is said about Moses our teacher, peace be upon him.

הַשָּׁלוֹם (שְׁמוֹת רַבָּה מ"ו ט') מֵאַיִן הָיָה אוֹכֵל מִזִּיו הַשְּׁכִינָה הָיָה נִזּוֹן אַל תִּתְמַהּ שֶׁהֲרֵי חַיּוֹת
Peace (Sh'mot Rabba 46:9) from where was he eating from the glory of the Shekhinah? He was nourished. Do not be amazed because there are animals.

שֶׁהֵן נוֹשְׂאוֹת הַכִּסֵּא נִזּוֹנוֹת מִזִּיו הַשְּׁכִינָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְאַתָּה מְחַיֶּה אֶת כֻּלָּם" כְּלוֹמַר לְכֻלָּם כִּי קִיּוּם הַנֶּפֶשׁ
That they, who carry the throne, are nourished from the radiance of the Divine Presence, as it is said, "And You give life to all"—that is, to all, because the sustenance of the soul.

בְּהִתְיַחֲדָה בְּדַעַת עֶלְיוֹן כְּקִיּוּם הַמַּלְאָכִים בּוֹ וְהִתְעַלּוּת הַנֶּפֶשׁ עַל הַגּוּף מְבַטֶּלֶת הַכּוֹחוֹת הַגּוּפָנִיּוֹת כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ לְעֵיל
In uniting with the knowledge of the Supreme, as the existence of the angels in Him and the elevation of the soul over the body, it nullifies the bodily powers, as we mentioned above.

פַּעַם אַחֶרֶת עַד שֶׁיִּתְקַיֵּם הַגּוּף כְּקִיּוּם הַנֶּפֶשׁ בְּלֹא אֲכִילָה וּשְׁתִיָּה כְּקִיּוּם מֹשֶׁה רַבֵּנוּ עָלָיו הַשָּׁלוֹם בָּהָר
Another time until the body will be sustained like the soul's sustenance without eating and drinking, like the sustenance of Moses our teacher, peace be upon him, on the mountain.

אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם וְאִם נִחַשׁ זֶה אֶל מַעֲשֵׂה הַנֵּס הִנֵּה אֵלִיָּהוּ יוֹכִיחַ שֶׁלֹּא הוּשְׁלַךְ הַגּוּף מִמֶּנּוּ וְלֹא
Forty days, and if we attribute this to the miracle, behold, Elijah will prove that his body was not thrown out of him and not.

נִפְרַד מִן הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְהִתְקַיֵּם מֵאָז וְעַד עוֹלָם וְכֵן חֲנוֹךְ כְּפִי מִדְרָשׁ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה וְכֵן אָמְרוּ
He was separated from the soul and existed from then until eternity, and similarly Enoch, according to the midrash of our sages, their memory be blessed, and they said.

כִּי כׇּל אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה הָאֱלֹהִים הוּא יִהְיֶה לְעוֹלָם עָלָיו אֵין לְהוֹסִיף
For whatever God does will endure forever; there is nothing to add to it.

אָמַר רַבִּי סִימוֹן רָאוּי הָיָה הָאָדָם שֶׁיִּתְקַיֵּם וְיִחְיֶה לְעוֹלָם מֵהַדִּין פָּסוּקָא וּמִפְּנֵי מָה נִקְנְסָה עָלָיו מִיתָה
Rabbi Simon said: It was fitting that man should exist and live forever, from that verse, and why was death imposed upon him?

אֶלָּא "וְהָאֱלֹהִים עָשָׂה שֶׁיִּירְאוּ מִלְּפָנָיו" מָה שֶׁהָיָה כְּבָר הוּא רַבִּי יוּדָן וְרַבִּי נְחֶמְיָה חַד אָמַר אִם
But "and God made that they fear before Him" what was already is Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Nehemiah one said if.

יֹאמַר לְךָ אָדָם שֶׁאִלּוּלֵי לֹא חָטָא אָדָם הָרִאשׁוֹן הָיָה חַי וְקַיָּם לְעוֹלָם אֱמֹר לוֹ הֲרֵי אֵלִיָּהוּ
A person will say to you: "If Adam the first had not sinned, he would be alive and existing forever." Say to him: "Behold, Elijah."

שֶׁלֹּא חָטָא הֲרֵי הוּא חַי וְקַיָּם לְעוֹלָם הֲרֵי בֵּאֲרוּ שֶׁרְצוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים בְּמַעֲשָׂיו מְקַיֵּם אוֹתָם לְעוֹלָם וְהֵבִיאוּ
That he did not sin, behold he is alive and existing forever; behold they explained that the will of God in his deeds sustains them forever and they brought it.

הראיה מאליהו זכור לטוב והנביא אמר "הנה אנכי שולח לכם את אליה הנביא לפני בוא יום ה'


"הַגָּדוֹל וְהַנּוֹרָא" זֹאת רְאָיָה שֶׁלֹּא נִפְרְדָה נַפְשׁוֹ מִגּוּף הַקָּדוֹשׁ וְהִתְקַיֵּם קִיּוּם אֱנוֹשִׁי וְאִם נֹאמַר שֶׁנִּסְתַּלְּקָה מִמֶּנּוּ
"The great and awesome one" is evidence that his soul did not separate from the holy body and he maintained a human existence, and if we say that it was removed from him.

תְּהֵא הַבְטָחָה מְפֹרֶשֶׁת עַל תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וּשְׁתֵּיהֶן קוֹרְעוֹת לֵב קְטַנֵּי הָאֱמוּנָה.
May there be an explicit promise about the resurrection of the dead, and both of them tear the heart of those with little faith.

וְהִנֵּה רָאִינוּ כִּי זַכֵּי הַנֶּפֶשׁ קִיּוּם גּוּפָם בַּדְּבָרִים הַדַּקִּים וְהַזַּכִּים מֵהֶם בְּדַקִּים מִן הַדַּקִּים כִּי אַנְשֵׁי
And behold, we have seen that the righteous of the soul maintain their bodies in fine and pure things, from them the fine from the fine, because of the men.

הַמָּן נִתְקַיְּמוּ בַּמָּן הַנִּבְלָע בָּאֵיבָרִים שֶׁהוּא מִתּוֹלְדוֹת הָאוֹר הָעֶלְיוֹן הַמִּתְגַּשֵּׁם בְּרָצוֹן הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ וְזָכוּ בַּדָּבָר מִשָּׁעָה.
The manna was sustained in the manna that was absorbed in the limbs, which is from the lineage of the upper light that materializes in the will of the Creator, may He be blessed, and they benefited from it from that hour.

שֶׁנִּתְעַלְּתָה נַפְשָׁם בְּמָה שֶׁהִשִּׂיגוּ בְּנִפְלָאוֹת כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ (מְכִילְתָּא בְּשֶׁלַח) "רָאֲתָה שִׁפְחָה עַל הַיָּם מָה שֶׁלֹּא רָאָה"
that their soul was elevated in what they achieved in wonders, as they said (Mechilta Beshalach) "A maidservant saw on the sea what he did not see".

יְחֶזְקֵאל הַנָּבִיא" וּמֹשֶׁה שֶׁנִּתְעַלְּתָה נַפְשׁוֹ וְנִתְיַחֲדָה יוֹתֵר מֵהֶם בְּיַדְיעַת בּוֹרְאוֹ לֹא הֻצְרַךְ לַדָּבָר הַהוּא שֶׁנִּתְגַּשֵּׁם וְנִתְקַיֵּם
Ezekiel the prophet and Moses whose soul was elevated and more distinguished than them in the knowledge of his Creator, did not need that thing which was embodied and fulfilled.

גּוּפוֹ בְּזִיו הַשְּׁכִינָה וּבְהַשָּׂגַת הָעֶלְיוֹנִים וּמָצָאתִי בַּמְּכִילְתָּא (וַיִּסַּע ד) "הַיּוֹם לֹא תִּמְצָאוּהוּ בַּשָּׂדֶה" אָמַר לָהֶם הַיּוֹם
His body in the glory of the Shekhinah and in the attainment of the upper ones, and I found in the Mechilta (Vayesah D) "Today you will not find him in the field" he said to them today.

אֵין אַתֶּם מוֹצְאִים אוֹתוֹ אֲבָל אַתֶּם מוֹצְאִים אוֹתוֹ לְמָחָר רַבִּי אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן חִסְמָא אוֹמֵר בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה
You do not find him, but you will find him tomorrow. Rabbi Elazar ben Hisma says in this world.

אֵין אַתֶּם מוֹצְאִין אוֹתוֹ אֲבָל אַתֶּם מוֹצְאִין אוֹתוֹ לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְזוֹ הַמִּימְרָה מִתְפָּרֶשֶׁת עַל אֶחָד מִשְׁתַּיִם
You do not find him, but you find him in the World to Come, and this saying is interpreted about one of two.

דַּרְכֵי אוֹ שֶׁנֹּאמַר שֶׁיִּהְיוּ בִּבְנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא מִי שֶׁלֹּא יַגִּיעַ מַעֲלָתָם לֵהָנוֹת תָּמִיד מִזִּיו הַשְּׁכִינָה וְיִהְיֶה
Ways, or it is said that there will be in the children of the world to come those who will not attain their rank to always enjoy the light of the Shekhinah, and it will be.

קִיּוּמָם בַּדָּבָר הַמִּתְגַּשֵּׁם מִן הַזִּיו הַהוּא בְּמַעֲלַת דּוֹר הַמִּדְבָּר אוֹ נִפְרֵשׁ שֶׁרָמַז הַכָּתוּב לְדַעַת רַבִּי אֶלְעָזָר
Their existence in the matter that is actualized from that radiance in the rank of the generation of the desert, or we may explain that the Scripture alludes to the opinion of Rabbi Elazar.

בֶּן חַסְמָא בְּמִלַּת "הַיּוֹם" שֶׁאַנְשֵׁי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא יִהְיֶה קִיּוּמָם בִּיסוֹד הַמָּן שֶׁהוּא הַזִּיו הָעֶלְיוֹן רָמַז עַל
Ben Chasma in the word "today" that the people of the next world will be sustained in the foundation of manna, which is the upper light, hinted at.

עִקַּר הַמָּן וְרֶמֶז עַל קִיּוּם בְּנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא כָּךְ נִרְאֶה לִי וְזֶהוּ שֶׁאָמְרוּ בְּמַסֶּכֶת יוֹמָא (עה ב')
The main point of manna and a hint about the existence of the people of the next world is how it appears to me, and this is what they said in the tractate of Yoma (Yoma 75b).

"לחם אבירים אכל איש" לחם שמלאכי השרת אוכלין דברי רבי ישמעאל רצה לומר מזיו השכינה שמלאכים


חַיִּים מִמֶּנּוּ וְאָמַר לוֹ רַבִּי עֲקִיבָא יִשְׂמָעֵאל טָעִית וְכִי מַלְאֲכֵי הַשָּׁרֵת אוֹכְלִין לֶחֶם וַהֲלֹא כְּבָר נֶאֱמַר
He lived from him, and Rabbi Akiva said to Yishmael, 'You have erred. Do angels of the host eat bread? And has it not already been said...'

"לֶחֶם לֹא אָכַלְתִּי וּמַיִם לֹא שָׁתִיתִי" תָּפְסוּ מִפְּנֵי שֶׁשָּׁם קִיּוּמָם בְּעִנְיָן גַּשְׁמִי מִתּוֹלְדוֹת הַזִּיו הָעֶלְיוֹן וְהֵם
"Bread I did not eat and water I did not drink" they caught because there their existence in a material matter from the offspring of the upper light and they.

קַיָּמִים בָּאוֹר עַצְמוֹ וְעַל כֵּן נַאֲמִין אֲנַחְנוּ בְּמָה שֶׁאָמְרוּ (סַנְהֶדְרִין צב א') מֵתִים שֶׁעָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ
They exist in the light of themselves, and therefore we believe in what they said (Sanhedrin 92a) that the dead are destined for the Holy One, blessed be He.

הוּא לְהַחְיוֹת שׁוּב אֵינָן חוֹזְרִין לְעַפְרָם וְאִם תֹּאמַר אוֹתָן אֶלֶף שָׁנִים שֶׁעָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְחַדֵּשׁ
He is to revive again, they are not returning to their dust, and if you say those thousand years that the Holy One, Blessed be He, is to renew.

עוֹלָמוֹ מָה הֵן עוֹשִׂין הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עוֹשֶׂה לָהֶם כְּנָפַיִם וְהֵם שׁוֹטִים עַל פְּנֵי הַמַּיִם וּפֵרוּשׁ "כְּנָפַיִם"
His world, what are they doing? The Holy One, blessed be He, makes wings for them and they swim on the surface of the water. And the explanation of "wings".

לְבִישַׁת הַנֶּפֶשׁ מְלָאכוֹת וְתִתְלַבֵּשׁ הַגּוּף עִמָּהּ וְשֶׁלֹּא תִּתְבַּטֵּל בְּבִטּוּל הַיְסוֹדוֹת וְזֶה עִנְיָן מֻרְגָּל מְאוֹד וְשָׁגוּר בְּפִיהֶם
The clothing of the soul with works, and the body will be clothed with it, and that it will not be nullified in the nullification of the elements, and this is a very common matter and familiar in their mouths.

זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ בְּכׇל הַמִּדְרָשׁוֹת וּבַתַּלְמוּד "לְמַעַן יִיטַב לָךְ"
Their memory is for a blessing, as they said in all the Midrashim and in the Talmud, "so that it will be good for you."

לְעוֹלָם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ טוֹב "וְהַאֲרִיכַת יָמִים" לְעוֹלָם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ אָרֹךְ רוֹצֶה לוֹמַר שֶׁכׇּל הַזּוֹכִים לוֹ אַרְכֵי הַיָּמִים הֵם
For a world that is all good 'and the lengthening of days' for a world that is all long means that all those who win it are the long days.

שֶׁאֵין בּוֹ הַמָּוֶת וּמְפֹרָשׁ אָמְרוּ בְּשִׁלְהֵי חֻלִּין אֵין לְךָ כׇּל מִצְוָה וּמִצְוָה שֶׁכְּתוּבָה בַּתּוֹרָה שֶׁמַּתַּן שְׂכָרָהּ
that there is no death in it, and it is explicitly stated in the end of Chullin: "There is no mitzvah and mitzvah written in the Torah that its reward is not given."

בְּצִדָּה שֶׁאֵין תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים תְּלוּיָה בָּהּ שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "לְמַעַן יִיטַב לְךָ וְהֶאֱרַכְתָּ יָמִים" "לְמַעַן יִיטַב לְךָ" לְעוֹלָם
In its side where the resurrection of the dead is not dependent upon it, as it is said, "that it may go well with you and that you may live long," "that it may go well with you" forever.

שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ טוֹב "וְהַאֲרִיכַת יָמִים" לְעוֹלָם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ אָרֹךְ כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁאֵינָן חוֹזְרִין לְעַפְרָן לְעֵדִי עַד וּכְבָר כָּתַבְתִּיהָ לָזוֹ.
That it is all good, 'and the lengthening of days' to a world that is all long, that is, that they do not return to their dust forever and ever, and I have already written it for this.

וְאִם תָּשִׁיב עָלֵינוּ בְּהֱיוֹת הַגּוּף מְחֻבָּר מִכְּלֵי הַשִּׁמּוּשׁ לִפְעֻלַּת הַנֶּפֶשׁ לִשְׁלוֹשָׁה חֲלָקִים שֶׁהִזְכִּירוּ אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיּוּן וְהֵם
And if you answer us that the body, when attached to the instruments of use for the operation of the soul, is divided into three parts that the men of contemplation have mentioned, and they are...

כְּלֵי הַמָּזוֹן וּכְלֵי הַזֶּרַע וּכְלֵי תִּקּוּן הַגּוּף וְהַגּוּף בִּכְלָלוֹ צֹרֶךְ מְצִיאוּתוֹ הָיָה בַּעֲבוּר תַּכְלִית אַחַת וְהִיא
The instruments of food and the instruments of seed and the instruments of body repair and the body in its entirety, the need for their existence was for one purpose, and that is...

אֲכִילַת הַמָּזוֹן לְקִיּוּם הַגּוּף וּלְהוֹלִיד דְּמִיּוֹנוֹ וְכֶשֶׁתִּסְתַּלֵּק הַתַּכְלִית הַהוּא בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁאֵין בּוֹ לֹא אֲכִילָה וְלֹא
The eating of food for the sustenance of the body and to produce its likeness, and when that purpose is removed in the world to come, where there is neither eating nor...

שְׁתִיָּה לָמָּה יִהְיֶה הַגּוּף פּוֹעֵל רֵיק וְאֵין בְּמַעֲשֵׂה הָאֱלֹהִים פּוֹעֵל בָּטֵל הִנֵּה הַתְּשׁוּבָה לְכׇל זֶה כִּי
Drinking, why would the body be an empty action and there is no idle action in God's work? Here is the answer to all of this because...

הִתְהָה הַבְּרִיאָה הַזֹּאת לִתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים לְצֹרֶךְ הַשִּׁמּוּשִׁים הַנִּזְכָּרִים וְאֵין הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא רוֹצֶה בְּבִטּוּלָהּ אַחֲרֵי כֵן
This creation was for the resurrection of the dead for the sake of the uses mentioned, and the Holy One, blessed be He, does not want its nullification afterwards.

וְעוֹד יֵשׁ בְּצוּרָה הַזֹּאת סוֹדוֹת עֲמֻקִּים כִּי לֹא הָיְתָה הַצּוּרָה עַל זֶה הַדְּמוּת הֶפְקֵר וּלְלֹא טַעַם
And there are also deep secrets in this form, because the form was not on this image for free and without reason.

רַק לְצֹרֶךְ גָּדוֹל וְטַעַם נִכְבָּד וְהָעוֹשׂוֹ יִתְבָּרֵךְ רוֹצֶה בְּקִיּוּמוֹ.
Only for a great need and a noble purpose, and the Creator, may He be blessed, desires its existence.

וְאִם תִּקְשֶׁה עָלֵינוּ קִיּוּם הַגּוּף מִן הַשְּׁפָלִים לְעוֹלָם כְּבָר הֵשִׁיבוֹנוּ אֵלֶיךָ כִּי קִיּוּם הַגּוּף יִהְיֶה בְּקִיּוּם
And if the existence of the body from the lowly to eternity is difficult for us, we have already answered you that the existence of the body will be in existence.

הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְקִיּוּם הַנֶּפֶשׁ בְּהִתְיַחֲדָהּ בְּדַעַת עֶלְיוֹן וְהַמִּתְקַיֵּם יִהְיֶה בְּמָקוֹם מִתְקַיֵּם בְּהִתְיַחֲדוֹ בּוֹ כַּאֲשֶׁר נַאֲמִין אֲפִלּוּ בַּפָּשׁוּט
The soul and the existence of the soul in its unification with the knowledge of the Supreme Being, and the one who is sustained will be in a place of being sustained in his unification with it, as we believe even in the simple (plain) sense.

הַפְּסוּקִים הַכְּתוּבִים עַל אָדָם הָרִאשׁוֹן שֶׁיִּתְקַיֵּם וְיִחְיֶה לָעַד אֵלּוּ לֹא שָׁחַט בַּחֶטְא הַהוּא וַאֲפִלּוּ שֶׁנַּאֲמִין בְּחֻרְבָּן
The verses written about the first man that he will exist and live forever, these are not the sin of that sin, and even if we believe in destruction.

הָעוֹלָם בִּשְׁנַת הַשְּׁמִטָּה וְכָךְ נַאֲמִין וְנִתְחַזֵּק אֵצֶל הַכֹּל בֶּאֱמֶת הָרְאוּת כּוֹחַ הַנֶּפֶשׁ עַל הַגּוּף הָאָפֵל בְּדִבּוּקָה
The world in the year of release, and thus we will believe and be strengthened among all in the truth of the vision of the power of the soul over the dark body in its attachment.

בְּדַעַת עֶלְיוֹן כְּעִנְיַן קָרוֹן פְּנֵי מֹשֶׁה כִּפְנֵי חַמָּה וּפְנֵי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ כִּפְנֵי לְבָנָה (בָּבָא בַּתְרָא עה ב')
In the mind of the Supreme, as in the matter of a carriage, the face of Moses is like the sun, and the face of Joshua is like the moon.

וְכֵן אָמְרוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה עַל אָדָם הָרִאשׁוֹן (בָּבָא בַּתְרָא נַח א') וְעַל כֹּל דָּבֵק בְּיוֹצְרוֹ
And so our sages, may their memory be blessed, said about the first man (Bava Batra 58a) and about all who are attached to their Creator.

וּמִתְלַבֵּשׁ בְּרוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ אָמְרוּ עָלָיו עַל פִּנְחָס (וַיִּקְרָא רַבָּה א א) בְּשָׁעָה שֶׁהָיָה רוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ שׁוֹרָה
And he was clothed in the Holy Spirit; they said about him about Pinchas (Vayikra Rabbah I:1) at the time when the Holy Spirit was resting.

עָלָיו הָיוּ פָּנָיו בּוֹעֲרוֹת כְּלַפִּידִים וְאָמְרוּ עָלָיו עַל רַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר הַגָּדוֹל (פִּרְקֵי דְּרַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר ב) כְּשֶׁהָיָה
On him his face was burning like torches, and they said about him about Rabbi Eliezer the Great (Chapters of Rabbi Eliezer B) when he was.

דּוֹרֵשׁ בְּמַעֲשֵׂה בְּרֵאשִׁית הָיוּ קַרְנוֹתָיו יוֹצְאוֹת כְּקַרְנוֹתָיו שֶׁל מֹשֶׁה וְאֵין אָדָם מַכִּיר אִם יוֹם אִם לַיְלָה וְכֵן.
One who studies the creation story, his horns were protruding like Moses' horns, and no one could tell if it was day or night, and so on.

אָמְרוּ בְּסִפְרֵי (דְּבָרִים י) פְּנֵיהֶם שֶׁל צַדִּיקִים לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא דּוֹמוֹת לַחַמָּה וְלַלְּבָנָה וְלָרָקִיעַ לַכּוֹכָבִים וְלַבְּרָקִים וּלְשׁוֹשַׁנִּים וּלְמְנוֹרַת
It is said in Sifrei (Deuteronomy 10) that the faces of the righteous in the future will resemble the sun, the moon, the firmament, the stars, lightning, roses, and the menorah.

בֵּית הַמִּקְדָּשׁ וְאִם דֵּעוֹתֵינוּ לֹא יַשִּׂיגוּ בַּחֲקִירָה מֵאֵיזֶה צַד תִּהְיֶה הַמִּדָּה הַזֹּאת אֲבָל נַאֲמִין שֶׁהוּא כֵּן
The Temple, and if our opinions do not reach a conclusion in the investigation from which side this measure will be, but we will believe that it is so.

כִּי הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ שְׁמוֹ יוֹדֵעַ מִסּוֹדוֹת הַנֶּפֶשׁ וּמַהוּתָהּ יוֹתֵר מֵהַתַּחְכְּמוּתֵנוּ וְעוֹד אֲנַחְנוּ רוֹאִים שֶׁחֶפְצֵי הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַמִּזְדַּמְּנִים
Because the Creator, may His name be blessed, knows the secrets of the soul and its essence more than our cleverness, and we also see that the desires of the soul that come along are... (the translation is incomplete in the source, but it seems to be about the soul's desires that arise.)

כְּרָצוֹנָה נוֹתְנִין לוֹ לַגּוּף הֲנָאָה וּמוֹסִיפִין בּוֹ זֹהַר וְהָדָר וְרָאוּת וְשׁוּמָן וּבְרִיאוּת אֲפִלּוּ בְּבוֹאָם אֵלָיו בְּעָמָל
As she wishes, they give him pleasure for the body and add to it radiance and splendor and sight and fatness and health, even when they come to him with labor.

וְיַגְעָה וְכׇל שֶׁכֵּן חׇכְמָה לַחֲכָמִים כְּעִנְיַן שֶׁכָּתוּב חׇכְמַת אָדָם תָּאִיר פָּנָיו וְכׇל שֶׁכֵּן שֶׁזֹּאת הַקּוּשְׁיָה שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ
And exertion, and all the more so wisdom for the wise, as in the matter written: "The wisdom of man will illuminate his face," and all the more so that this difficulty which we mentioned.

בְּקִיּוּם הַגּוּף לָנֶצַח אֵינָהּ עַל דַּעַת הַפִילוֹסוֹפִים וְלֹא עַל דַּעַת חֲכָמֵי תּוֹרָתֵנוּ הַמְּפָרְשִׁים כִּי הַפִילוֹסוֹפִים מְקַיְּמִים
The eternal existence of the body is not according to the opinion of the philosophers nor according to the opinion of the sages of our Torah who interpret that the philosophers maintain.

כְּלָלוֹ לָעַד (מוֹרֵה נְבוּכִים ב כז כט) וְחַכְמֵינוּ קְצָתָם יוֹדוּ בְּקִיּוּמוֹ וְאֵין אֶצְלָם חֲזָרַת הָעוֹלָם לְתֹהוּ
Its summary is eternal (Guide for the Perplexed II:27-29), and some of our sages acknowledge its existence, while they do not accept the world's return to chaos.

ובהו כי כל נברא ברצון הבורא קיומו ברצונו אם לזמן אם לנצח וכמו שיאמינו הם בעיונם


קִיּוּם הַכְּלָלִים לָעַד כָּךְ אֲנַחְנוּ יְכוֹלִים בְּקַבָּלוֹתֵנוּ לְהַאֲמִין בְּקִיּוּם הַפְּרָט בִּרְצוֹן הַמִּתְעַלֶּה שְׁמוֹ כִּי כְּמוֹ שֶׁיֵּשׁ
Because of the eternal existence of the rules, we can in our acceptance believe in the existence of the individual in the will of the exalted name, because like what exists.

רָצוֹן כְּלָלִי כָּךְ יֵשׁ רָצוֹן פְּרָטִי בַּפְּרָט וְאַף עַל פִּי שֶׁנִּרְאֶה בָּעוֹלָם בִּטּוּל הַפְּרָטִים וְקִיּוּם הַכְּלָלִי
There is a general will, and so there is a particular will in the particular, and even though it appears in the world that the particulars are nullified and the general is sustained.

הִנֵּה אֱמוּנָתֵנוּ הִיא כִּי הָיָה זֶה בְּבַעֲלֵי הַנֶּפֶשׁ מִפְּנֵי הַחֵטְא נָחָשׁ הַקַּדְמוֹנִי וְהָעֹנֶשׁ הַנִּגְזָר עָלָיו אֲבָל
Behold, our belief is that this was in the owners of the soul because of the sin of the ancient serpent and the punishment decreed upon him, but...

הָרָצוֹן הַנִּצְחִי מְקַיֵּם רְצוֹנוֹ לָנֶצַח כְּמוֹ שֶׁהִזְכַּרְנוּ לְמַעְלָה מִדִּבְרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה.
The eternal will fulfills its will forever, as we mentioned above from the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed.

עַכְשָׁו בֵּאַרְנוּ כַּוָּנָתֵנוּ בִּשְׂכַר הַמִּצְוֹת וְעֻנְשָׁן וְנַחְזֹר בִּקְצָרָה כִּי שָׂכָר הַנְּפָשׁוֹת וְקִיּוּמָם בְּעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת נִקְרָא לְרַבּוֹתֵינוּ
Now we have explained our intention regarding the reward of the commandments and their punishment, and we will return briefly because the reward of souls and their existence in the world of souls is called by our sages.

זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה "גַּן עֵדֶן" וּפְעָמִים קוֹרִין אוֹתוֹ "עֲלִיָּה" וְ"יְשִׁיבָה שֶׁלְּמַעְלָה" וְאַחֲרֵי כֵן יָבוֹא הַמָּשִׁיחַ וְהוּא מִכְּלָל
Their memory be blessed, "Garden of Eden," and sometimes they call it "ascent" and "the yeshiva above," and after that the Messiah will come, and he is from the general.

חַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וּבְסוֹפָהּ יִהְיֶה יוֹם הַדִּין וּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים שֶׁהוּא הַשָּׂכָר הַכּוֹלֵל הַגּוּף וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ וְהוּא הָעִקָּר
Life in this world, and at its end there will be the Day of Judgment and the resurrection of the dead, which is the reward that encompasses the body and the soul, and it is the main thing.

הַגָּדוֹל שֶׁהוּא תְּקוּת כׇּל מִקְוֶה לַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא וְהוּא הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁבּוֹ יָשׁוּב הַגּוּף כְּמוֹ נֶפֶשׁ
The great one who is the hope of every desire for the Holy One, blessed be He, and he is the world to come in which the body will return like a soul.

וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ תִּדָּבֵק בְּדַעַת עֶלְיוֹן כְּהִדָּבְקוּת בְּגַן עֵדֶן עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וְתִתְעַלֶּה בְּהַשָּׂגָה גְּדוֹלָה מִמֶּנָּה וְיִהְיֶה קִיּוּם הַכֹּל
And the soul will be attached to the knowledge of the Supreme, like the attachment in the Garden of Eden, the world of souls, and it will rise to a greater understanding than itself, and there will be the continuation of everything.

לְעֵדִי עֵד וּלְנֶצַח נְצָחִים סִימָן לַדְּבָרִים הַלָּלוּ וְרֶמֶז לָהֶם בַּתּוֹרָה שֵׁשֶׁת יְמֵי הַמַּעֲשֶׂה בַּשִּׁשִּׁי נִבְרָא אָדָם
For an everlasting witness and for eternity of eternities, a sign for these things and a hint to them in the Torah: six days of creation, on the sixth day man was created.

וְגָמַר מַעֲשָׂיו בַּשְּׁבִיעִי שַׁבָּת כָּךְ מַלְכֵי הָאֻמּוֹת בָּעוֹלָם חֲמִשָּׁה כְּנֶגֶד יְצִירַת הָעוֹפוֹת וְשִׁרְצֵי הַמַּיִם וּשְׁאַר דְּבָרִים
And He completed His works on the seventh Sabbath; thus the kings of the nations in the world are five, corresponding to the creation of birds and water creatures and other things.

וְתוֹפֶסֶת מַלְכוּתָם בַּשִּׁשִּׁי מְעַט כְּנֶגֶד יְצִירַת בְּהֵמָה וְחַיָּה שֶׁנִּבְרְאוּ בִּתְחִלָּתָן מַלְכוּת בֵּית דָּוִד בָּאֶלֶף הַשִּׁשִּׁי כְּנֶגֶד
And their kingdom holds in the sixth (day/year) a small amount compared to the creation of animals and beasts that were created at the beginning; the kingdom of the house of David in the sixth thousand (year) corresponds to...

יְצִירָתוֹ שֶׁלָּאָדָם שֶׁמַּכִּיר אֶת בּוֹרְאוֹ וּמוֹשֵׁל בְּכֻלָּם וּבְסוֹף אוֹתָן אֶלֶף יִהְיֶה יוֹם הַדִּין שֶׁכׇּל אָדָם נִדּוֹן
His creation for a man who knows his Creator and rules over all of them, and at the end of those thousand years there will be the Day of Judgment that every man is judged.

בּוֹ בַּיּוֹם וּשְׁבִיעִי שַׁבָּת וְהוּא הַתְּחִלַּת הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְאֵין לַזּוֹכִים בּוֹ קֵץ וְסוֹף אֶלָּא מִתְקַיְּמִין בְּרָצוֹן
In that day and the seventh Sabbath, which is the beginning of the next world, and those who are blessed in it have no end or limit, but they endure in will.

הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ וְיִתְעַלֶּה חֶפְצוֹ וּרְצוֹנוֹ הַמְּקַיְּמָן וְכֵן שֵׁשֶׁת שְׁנֵי שָׁבוּעַ וּבַשְּׁבִיעִית שְׁמִטָּה רֶמֶז לְעִנְיָן הַזֶּה וּמִכָּאן
The Creator, may He be blessed and exalted, His will and desire that sustains them, and likewise the six years of the week and in the seventh year the sabbatical year is a hint to this matter and from here.

יִלְמֹד הַחָכָם סוֹד הַיּוֹבְלוֹת (רמב"ן לְוִיקְרָא כה ב) וְיֵדַע הָעִנְיָן בְּכֻלּוֹ וּבָרוּךְ הַיּוֹדֵעַ וְהַמְּלַמֵּד לָאָדָם דַּעַת.
Let the wise man study the secret of the jubilees (Ramban to Leviticus 25:2) and know the matter in its entirety, and blessed is He who knows and teaches man knowledge.

וּבְמִדְרָשׁ רַבִּי נְחוּנְיָא (סֵפֶר הַבָּהִיר קֶנֶט) מָצִינוּ יָשַׁב רַבִּי בְּרֶכְיָה וְדָרַשׁ מַאי הַאי דְּאָמְרִינַן "הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא".
And in the Midrash of Rabbi Nehonya (Sefar HaBahir Kent) we found that Rabbi Berechiah sat and expounded what is this that we say "the world to come."

וְלֹא יוֹדְעִין מַאי קָאָמְרִין "הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" מְתַרְגְּמִינָן "עָלְמָא דְּאָתֵי" מְלַמֵּד שֶׁקֹּדֶם שֶׁנִּבְרָא הָעוֹלָם עָלָה בְּמַחְשָׁבָה לִבְרֹא
And they do not know what they are saying, "the world to come." We translate it "the world that is coming." It teaches that before the world was created, it rose in thought to create.

אור ונברא אור גדול שאין כל בריה יכולה לשלוט בו צפה הקדוש ברוך הוא שאין יכולין


לְסִבְלוֹ לָקַח שְׁבִיעִית וְשָׂם לָהֶם בִּמְקוֹמָם וְהַשְּׁאָר גָּנְזוּ לָעֲתִיד לָבוֹא וְאָמַר אִם זָכוּ בָּזֶה הַשְּׁבִיעִית וְיִשְׁמְרוּהוּ
For his suffering he took a seventh and placed it in their place, and the rest he stored for the future, and said: If they merit this seventh and keep it.

אֶתֵּן לָהֶם זֶה לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אַחֲרוֹן וְהַיְנוּ דִּכְתִיב "הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" שֶׁכְּבָר בָּא מִקֹּדֶם שֵׁשֶׁת יְמֵי בְרֵאשִׁית
I will give them this for the next world, the last one, and this is what is written: "the next world" which already came before the six days of creation.

הַדָּא הוּא דִּכְתִיב "מָה רַב טוּבְךָ אֲשֶׁר צָפַנְתָּ לְיִרְאֶיךָ פָּעַלְתָּ לַחוֹסִים בְּךָ נֶגֶד בְּנֵי אָדָם" פֵּרוּשׁ
This is what is written: 'How great is your goodness that you have hidden for those who fear you, you have worked for those who trust in you against the sons of men.' Explanation.

"הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא" שֶׁכְּבָר בָּא וְזָכַר לְשׁוֹן תַּרְגּוּם שֶׁלּוֹ שֶׁקּוֹרִין אוֹתוֹ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה עַלְמָא דְּאָתֵי לִלְמֹד
"the next world" that has already come and remembered the language of its translation that the sages, may their memory be blessed, call "the world to come" to teach.

שֶׁהוּא מְמַשְׁמֵשׁ וּבָא וּבֵאֵר שֶׁזֶּה הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הוּא אוֹר וְהוּא הָאוֹר שֶׁעָלָה בְּמַחְשָׁבָה וְנִבְרָא קֹדֶם הָעוֹלָם
That he is touching and coming and explained that this coming world is light, and that light rose in thought and was created before the world.

הַזֶּה לֹאמַר שֶׁהוּא הַהַשָּׂגָה הָאַחֲרוֹנָה שֶׁאָדָם מַשִּׂיג וּמִתְעַלֶּה בָּהּ וְכֵן אָמְרוּ בְּבְרֵאשִׁית רַבָּה (ג ד) שֶׁאֹר
This is to say that it is the last attainment that a person attains and rises in, and so they said in Genesis Rabbah (3:4) that it is light.

הַזֶּה שֶׁאָדָם צוֹפֶה בּוֹ מִסּוֹף הָעוֹלָם וְעַד סוֹפוֹ וְהוּא עִנְיַן צְפִיַּת הַמֶּרְכָּבָה וּבוֹ מַשִּׂיגִים אֲמִתַּת הַנִּבְרָאִים
This is what a person sees from the end of the world to its end, and it is the matter of the vision of the chariot, and in it they attain the truth of the created beings.

בִּכְלָל וְזֶהוּ מִסּוֹף הָעוֹלָם וְעַד סוֹפוֹ וְזֶהוּ אוֹר הַחַיִּים כְּדִכְתִּיב "לָאוֹר בְּאוֹר הַחַיִּים" וְעוֹד אָמְרוּ שָׁם
In general, and this is from the end of the world to its end, and this is the light of life, as it is written "to the light in the light of life", and they also said there.

בְּמִדְרָשׁ רַבִּי נְחוּנְיָא בֶּן הַקָּנָה (סֵפֶר הַבָּהִיר קמו) וְכִסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד הַמְּעֻטָּר הַמְּכֻלָּל הַמְּהֻלָּל הַמְּאֻשָּׁר הוּא בַּיִת
In the Midrash of Rabbi Nehonya ben HaKana (Sefar HaBahir 146) and the Throne of Glory, the adorned, the assembled, the praised, the blessed, is a house.

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וּמְקוֹמוֹ חָקוּק בְּחׇכְמָה דִּכְתִיב "וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים יְהִי אוֹר וַיְהִי אוֹר" וְכׇל הַמִּדְרָשׁ עַד יִזְכּוּ
The next world and its place are inscribed in wisdom, as it is written, 'And God said, "Let there be light," and there was light,' and all the Midrash until they merit.

לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא הַטּוֹב הַגָּנוּז וּמַאי נִיהוּ עוֹזוֹ שֶׁל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא דִּכְתִיב "וְנֹגַהּ כְּאוֹר"
For the life of the world to come, which is the hidden good, and what is it? It is the strength of the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is written: 'and a light as of fire'.

תִּהְיֶה קַרְנַיִם מִיָּדוֹ לוֹ" שָׁם בְּכָאן בֵּית הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא בְּכִסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד מְקוֹם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת בְּעוֹלָמוֹ כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ.
"There will be horns from his hand for him" there, in this place, the house of the world to come, in the throne of glory, the place of souls in his world, as they said.

בָּעֲרָבוֹת שֶׁשָּׁם נִשְׁמוֹתֵיהֶן שֶׁל צַדִּיקִים וְשָׁם מַלְאֲכֵי הַשָּׁרֵת וְכִסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד כְּדְאִיתָא בְּמַסֶּכֶת חֲגִיגָה (יב ב') וְשָׁם מָקוֹם
In the deserts where the souls of the righteous are, and where the ministering angels and the throne of glory are, as it is stated in the tractate of Chagigah (12b) and there is a place.

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא חָקוּק בְּחׇכְמָה לְהוֹדִיעַ שֶׁהִגִּיעַ הַשְּׂגָתָהּ לָאוֹר הָרִאשׁוֹן שֶׁנִּקְרָא חׇכְמָה דִּכְתִיב "כִּי נֵר מִצְוָה וְתוֹרָה אוֹר"
The next world is inscribed in wisdom to inform that its attainment has reached the first light which is called wisdom, as it is written 'For the commandment is a lamp and the Torah is light.'

וְכָתִיב "חׇכְמַת אָדָם תָּאִיר פָּנָיו וְעֹז פָּנָיו יְשֻׁנֶּא" וְאִי אֶפְשָׁר לְפָרֵשׁ יוֹתֵר מִזֶּה.
And it is written, “The wisdom of man will illuminate his face, and the strength of his face will be diminished,” and it is impossible to interpret it any further.

וּמָה יִקְרוּ דִּבְרֵי הָרַב הַגָּדוֹל רַבִּי מֹשֶׁה בֶּן הַה"ר מִימוֹן הַדַּיָּן בְּמִלּוֹת קְצָרוֹת וַאֲרֻכּוֹת שֶׁכָּתַב בָּזֶה
And what are the words of the great rabbi, Rabbi Moses son of the rabbi Maimon the judge, in short and long words that he wrote about this?

הָעוֹלָם בְּפֵרוּשׁ פֶּרֶק חֵלֶק אָמַר כִּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא יַשְׂכִּילוּ נַפְשׁוֹתֵינוּ שָׁם מִסּוֹדוֹת הַבּוֹרֵא כְּפִי שֶׁיַּשְׂכִּילוּ בָּעוֹלָם
The world explicitly, a part of it, said that in the next world our souls will understand there the secrets of the Creator as they understand in this world.

הַזֶּה מִסּוֹדוֹת הַכּוֹכָבִים וְהַגַּלְגַּלִּים אוֹ יוֹתֵר וְכֵן אָמְרוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֵין בּוֹ לֹא
Is this from the secrets of the stars and the spheres, or more so? And so our sages, may their memory be blessed, said that the World to Come has none of it.

אֲכִילָה וְלֹא שְׁתִיָּה אֶלָּא צַדִּיקִים יוֹשְׁבִין וְעִטְרוֹתֵיהֶן בְּרָאשֵׁיהֶם וְנֶהֱנִין מִזִּיו שְׁכִינָה וְעִנְיַן "עִטְרוֹתֵיהֶן בְּרָאשֵׁיהֶם" רוֹצֶה לוֹמַר
Eating and not drinking, but the righteous sit and their crowns are on their heads, and they enjoy the glory of the Shekhinah. The meaning of "their crowns on their heads" is to say...

קִיּוּם הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַיּוֹדַעַת בְּקִיּוּם הַדָּבָר הַיָּדוּעַ לָהּ וְהִוְיָתָה הִיא וְהוּא דָּבָר אֶחָד כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ מִבֵּינֵי הַפִילוֹסוֹפִים
The existence of the knowing soul in the existence of the thing known to it, and its being is one thing, as the philosophers said.

בְּעִנְיַן יַאֲרֵךְ סִפּוּרוֹ וּמָה שֶׁאָמְרוּ "נֶהֱנִין מִזִּיו שְׁכִינָה" כַּוָּנָתָם לוֹמַר כִּי הַנְּפָשׁוֹת הַהֵם יִנְעֲמוּ בְּמָה שֶׁיַּשְׂכִּילוּ
Regarding the length of his story and what they said, "enjoying the radiance of the Divine Presence," their intention is to say that those souls will delight in what they understand.

מִסּוֹד הָאֵל יִתְבָּרֵךְ כְּמוֹ שֶׁיִּנְעֲמוּ חַיּוֹת הַקֹּדֶשׁ וּשְׁאַר כְּתוֹת הַמַּלְאָכִים בְּמָה שֶׁיַּשְׂכִּילוּ וְיֵדְעוּ מִסּוֹד הָאֵל אִם
From the secret of God, may He be blessed, as the holy animals and other groups of angels will be pleased in what they will understand and know from the secret of God, if.

כֵּן הַגְּמוּל הַטּוֹב וְתַכְלִית הַכַּוָּנָה הוּא שֶׁיַּשִּׂיג הָאָדָם אֶל הַגְּמוּל הָעֶלְיוֹן וְיִהְיֶה נִכְנָס בִּכְלַל הַהוּא וְקִיּוּם
Thus the good reward and the purpose of intention is that a person will attain the supreme reward and be included in that general and existence.

הַנֶּפֶשׁ כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמַרְנוּ יִהְיֶה עַד לְאֵין תַּכְלִית כְּקִיּוּם הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ כִּי הוּא סִבַּת קִיּוּמָה בְּהַשָּׂגָתָה אוֹתוֹ
The soul, as we said, will be until no end like the existence of the Creator, may He be blessed, because He is the cause of its existence in its perception of Him.

אֵלּוּ דִּבְרֵי הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה וְהֵם דְּבָרִים טְהוֹרִים וּכְבָר בָּאוּ כֻּלָּם בִּדְבָרֵי חֲכָמֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה כִּי
These are the words of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, and they are pure words, and all of them have already come in the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed, because...

הִזְכִּיר עֹנֶג הַנֶּפֶשׁ בְּקִיּוּמָה וְשָׂם אוֹתָהּ עִם כַּת חַיּוֹת הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְהַמַּלְאָכִים כְּמוֹ שֶׁשָּׂמוּ הֵם זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה
He mentioned the delight of the soul in its existence and placed it with the company of the holy animals and angels, as they did, may their memory be blessed.

עִמָּהֶם תַּחַת כִּסֵּא הַכָּבוֹד וְחָקְקוּ מְקוֹמוֹ בְּחׇכְמָה וְהִיא הַהַשָּׂגָה בְּעַצְמָהּ וְהַגְּמוּל הַשָּׁלֵם וְכֵן הִזְכִּירוּ רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם
With them under the throne of glory and they engraved his place in wisdom, and it is the attainment in itself and the complete reward, and likewise our sages mentioned their memory.

לְבִרְכָּה קִיּוּמָה כְּקִיּוּם הַחַיּוֹת וְהַמַּלְאָכִים לִכְתוֹתֵיהֶם בְּמָה שֶׁיִּנְעֲמוּ מֵהַשִּׂיגָתָם כְּמוֹ שֶׁדָּרְשׁוּ בַּכָּתוּב שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "בְּאוֹר פְּנֵי מֶלֶךְ חַיִּים".
For the blessing of its existence is like the existence of the animals and angels in their groups, in what they enjoy from their attainment, like what they interpreted in the scripture that says "In the light of the king's face there is life."

וְכְמוֹ שֶׁכָּתַבְנוּ לְמַעְלָה מִדִּבְרֵיהֶם זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה וְהִזְכִּירוּ עִנְיַן קִיּוּמוֹ בְּקִיּוּם הַדָּבָר הַיָּדוּעַ לָהֶם וְהֱיוֹת הוּא וְהֵן
And as we wrote above from their words, may their memory be blessed, and they mentioned the matter of his existence in the existence of the thing known to them and that he and they are.

דָּבָר אֶחָד וְהוּא פֵּרוּשׁ מָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר בַּתּוֹרָה "וְלִדְבְּקָה בּוֹ" וְאוֹמֵר "וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדוֹנִי צְרוּרָה בְּצִרּוּר הַחַיִּים"
One thing, and it is the interpretation of what is said in the Torah "and to cleave to Him" and says "and the soul of my lord shall be bound up in the bundle of life".

אֶת ה' אֱלֹהֶיךָ" וּמִכָּאן בָּא [רַבִּי עֲקִיבָא] וְלָמַד "אֶת ה' אֱלֹהֶיךָ תִּירָא" לְרַבּוֹת תַּלְמִידֵי חֲכָמִים וְרַבּוֹתֵינוּ
And from here came [Rabbi Akiva] and learned "You shall fear the Lord your God" to include Torah scholars and our sages.

זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה הֵם שֶׁהֵבִינוּ וּפֵרְשׁוּ דֶּרֶךְ וְעִנְיָן הַיְּחִידוּת הַזֶּה וְלֹא שֶׁיַּשִּׂיג הָאָדָם לִידִיעַת מַהוּתוֹ שֶׁהַיְּדִיעָה הוּא
Those whose memory is blessed are those who understood and explained the way and matter of this unity, and not that a person would attain knowledge of His essence, because knowledge is...

הַזְּכוּת בְּעַצְמוֹ וְעַל זֶה אָמְרוּ (בְּרָכוֹת ל"ד ב')
The right in itself, and on this they said (Berakhot 34b).

כׇּל הַנְּבִיאִים כֻּלָּן לֹא נִתְנַבְּאוּ אֶלָּא לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ אֲבָל לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא "עַיִן לֹא רָאֲתָה אֱלֹהִים זוּלָתְךָ"
All the prophets, all of them, did not prophesy except for the days of the Messiah, but for the World to Come: "No eye has seen God except you."

יַעֲשֶׂה לַמְּחַכֶּה לוֹ וְזוֹ הַמִּימְרָה הִזְכִּירָה הָרַב הַגָּדוֹל זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה וּפֵרֵשׁ וְאָמַר כְּבָר הוֹדִיעוּנוּ חֲכָמִים הָרִאשׁוֹנִים
He will do for the one who waits for him, and this saying was mentioned by the great rabbi, may his memory be blessed, and he explained and said that the early sages had already informed us.

שְׁטוּבַת הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֵין כּוֹחַ בָּאָדָם לְהַשִּׂיגָהּ עַל בּוּרְיָהּ וְאֵין יוֹדֵעַ גְּדֻלָּהּ וְיָפְיָהּ אֶלָּא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ
The goodness of the World to Come cannot be attained by man on its own merits, and its greatness and beauty are known only to the Holy One, blessed be He.

הוּא לְבַדּוֹ הִנֵּה דִּבְרֵי הָרַב בְּמַעֲלַת זֶה הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וּבְעֹנֶג שֶׁלּוֹ דְּבָרִים נְכוֹנִים הֵם אֵין לָנוּ
He alone, behold, the words of the rabbi about the merit of this coming world and its pleasure are correct words; we have none.

אֶלָּא לְהוֹדוֹת בָּהֶן וּלְשַׁבֵּחַ מַעֲלוֹתֵיהֶן לִבְעָלֵיהֶן זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה.
But rather to give thanks for them and to praise their virtues to their owners, may their memory be blessed.

וְעוֹד כָּתַב בִּתְשׁוּבַת שְׁאֵלָה וּמָה שֶׁהִסְכִּימוּ חַכְמֵי יָוָן וְחַכְמֵי הַמַּעֲרָב בַּנֶּפֶשׁ שֶׁהַנֶּפֶשׁ צוּרָה בְּלֹא גּוּף וְלֹא
And further he wrote in a reply to a question, and what the sages of Greece and the sages of the West agreed upon about the soul, that the soul is a form without a body and not.

גּוּף אֲבָל טָהֵר וּגְזֵרָה וּמְקוֹר הַדַּעַת וְאֵינָהּ צְרִיכָה לַגּוּף לְפִיכָךְ כְּשֶׁיֹּאבֵד הַגּוּף לֹא תֹּאבֵד הִיא אֶלָּא
A body, but purity and decree and the source of knowledge, and it does not need a body; therefore when the body is lost, it is not lost, but rather...

עוֹמֶדֶת בְּעַצְמָהּ וְקַיֶּמֶת כְּמוֹ הַמַּלְאָךְ וְנֶהֱנֵית וְחוֹזֶה בְּאֲוִירוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם וְהוּא עוֹלָם הַבָּא גַּם זֶה לְשׁוֹנוֹ אֲבָל
Standing on its own and existing like the angel, and enjoying and seeing in the air of the world, and it is the coming world; also this is his language but...

מִכׇּל מָקוֹם שָׁנָה עָלֵינוּ סִדְרֵי הַקַּבָּלָה כִּי עָשָׂה זֶה הָעוֹלָם עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וְאֵין לַגּוּף בּוֹ חֵלֶק
In any case, the order of Kabbalah changed for us, because He made this world a world of souls, and the body has no part in it.

כְּמוֹ שֶׁפֵּרֵשׁ בְּכַמָּה מְקוֹמוֹת מִסִּפְרָיו וְכֵן יֵרָאֶה מִדְּבָרָיו שֶׁהוּא מְשַׁנֶּה עָלֵינוּ זְמַנּוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְהוּא לְדַעְתּוֹ
As he explained in several places in his books, and as can be seen from his words, he changes for us the time of the World to Come, and it is according to his opinion.

בָּא לָאָדָם אַחֲרֵי מִיתָתוֹ מִיָּד וְהוּא הָעֹנֶג וְהַנֹּעַם שֶׁקָּרִינוּ אוֹתוֹ אֲנַחְנוּ "גַּן עֵדֶן" וְכֵן כָּתַב הָרַב
It comes to a person immediately after his death, and it is the pleasure and delight that we call it 'Garden of Eden'; and so the rabbi wrote.

בְּסֵפֶר הַמַּדָּע (תְּשׁוּבָה ח ח) זֶה שֶׁקָּרְאוּ אוֹתוֹ חֲכָמִים הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא לֹא מִפְּנֵי שֶׁאֵינוֹ מָצוּי עַתָּה
In the Book of Knowledge (Response 8 8), this is what the sages called the World to Come, not because it is not present now.

וְזֶה הָעוֹלָם אָבַד וְאַחַר כָּךְ יָבוֹא אוֹתוֹ הָעוֹלָם אֵין הַדָּבָר כֵּן אֶלָּא הֲרֵי הוּא מָצוּי וְעוֹמֵד
And this world is lost, and after that the other world will come; it is not so, but rather it is present and standing.

שִׁכְתּוּב "אֲשֶׁר צָפַנְתָּ לְיִרְאֶיךָ פָּעַלְתָּ לַחוֹסִים בְּךָ" וְלֹא קְרָאוּהוּ עוֹלָם הַבָּא אֶלָּא מִפְּנֵי שֶׁאוֹתָן הַחַיִּים בָּאִין
It is written "Asher tzefanata liyraich pa'alta lechosim becha" and they did not call it the World to Come, but rather because those lives are coming.

לוּ לְאָדָם אַחֵר חַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה שֶׁאָנוּ קַיָּמִים בּוֹ בְּגוּף וּבְנֶפֶשׁ וְזֶהוּ הַנִּמְצָא לְכֹל אָדָם בָּרִאשׁוֹנָה
If another person had the life of this world that we exist in, in body and soul, and this is what is found for every person at first.

נִרְאֶה מִדְּבָרִים הַלָּלוּ שֶׁעוֹלָם הַבָּא הוּא עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת הַמַּגִּיעַ לָהֶם אַחֲרֵי מִיתַת הַגּוּפוֹת מִיָּד עוֹד כָּתַב
It appears from these words that the World to Come is the world of souls that comes to them after the death of the bodies, and immediately afterwards he wrote.

זכרונו לברכה (ח ב וראה עקרים ד ל) העולם הבא אין בו גוף וגויה אלא נפשות


הַצַּדִּיקִים בְּלֶבֶד בְּלֹא גּוּף כְּמַלְאֲכֵי הַשָּׁרֵת הוֹאִיל וְאֵין גּוּיוֹת אֵין בּוֹ לֹא אֲכִילָה וְלֹא שְׁתִיָּה וְלֹא
Only the righteous, without a body like the ministering angels, since there are no bodies, there is no eating or drinking in it.

דָּבָר מֵהַדְּבָרִים שֶׁבְּנֵי אָדָם צְרִיכִין לָהֶם בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְלֹא יֵאָרַע בּוֹ דָּבָר מִן הַדְּבָרִים שֶׁמְּאָרְעִין לַגּוּף
A thing from the things that people need in this world, and nothing will happen to it from the things that happen to the body.

בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה כְּגוֹן יְשִׁיבָה וַעֲמִידָה וְשֵׁנָה וּרְאִיָּה וְעֶצֶב וְשְׂחוֹק וְכַיּוֹצֵא בָּהֶן כָּךְ אָמְרוּ חֲכָמִים זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה
In this world, such as sitting and standing and sleeping and seeing and sadness and laughter and the like, so the sages said, may their memory be blessed.

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֵין בּוֹ לֹא אֲכִילָה וְלֹא שְׁתִיָּה וְלֹא תַּשְׁמִישׁ אֶלָּא צַדִּיקִים יוֹשְׁבִין וַעֲטֵרוֹתֵיהֶן בְּרָאשֵׁיהֶן וְנֶהֱנִין
The World to Come has no eating, no drinking, no sexual intercourse; rather, the righteous sit with their crowns on their heads and enjoy themselves.

מִזִּיו שְׁכִינָה הֲרֵי נִתְבָּאֵר לְךָ שֶׁאֵין שָׁם גּוּף לְפִי שֶׁאֵין שָׁם לֹא אֲכִילָה וְלֹא שְׁתִיָּה וְזֶה
From the radiance of the Divine Presence, it has been made clear to you that there is no corporeal body there, because there is neither eating nor drinking there, and this.

שֶׁאָמְרוּ "צַדִּיקִים יוֹשְׁבִין" עַל דֶּרֶךְ הַחִידָה הִיא כְּלוֹמַר נֶפֶשׁ הַצַּדִּיקִים מְצוּיוֹת שָׁם בְּלֹא עָמָל וְלֹא יְגִיעָה
That they said "the righteous are seated" in the manner of a riddle, meaning that the souls of the righteous are found there without labor and without toil.

וְכֵן זֶה שֶׁאָמְרוּ "עֲטָרוֹתֵיהֶן בְּרָאשֵׁיהֶן" כְּלוֹמַר שֶׁיָּדְעוּ בִּגְלָלָהּ זָכוּ לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא מְצוּיָה עִמָּהֶן וְהִיא הָעֲטֶרֶה
And likewise, this that they said, "their crowns on their heads," meaning that they knew because of it they merited the life of the world to come, which is present with them, and it is the crown.

שֶׁלָּהֶן וּמַהוּ זֶה שֶׁאָמְרוּ "וְנֶהֱנִין מִזִּיו הַשְּׁכִינָה"
Their [of them] and what is this that they said, 'and they enjoy from the glory of the Shechina'?

שיודעין ומשיגין מאמתת הקדוש ברוך הוא מה שאינן יודעין מהן בגוף האפל והשפל ועוד האריך הרב


זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה לְבָאֵר וּלְהָבִיא רְאָיוֹת שֶׁבְּנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הֵם הַנְּפָשׁוֹת לְבַד בְּלֹא הַגּוּף בְּפֶרֶק חֵלֶק וּבְמַגִּילָה
His memory for a blessing to explain and bring proofs that the people of the next world are only souls without bodies, in the chapter "Chalak" and in "Megillah".

שֶׁל תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים שֶׁלּוֹ וְעִנְיַן גַּן עֵדֶן אִצְלוֹ הוּא מָקוֹם מִפִּלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ שֶׁנָּטַע בּוֹ הָאֱלֹהִים הָאִילָנוֹת
His resurrection of the dead and the matter of the Garden of Eden with him is a place from the districts of the earth that God planted in it the trees.

וּמִמִּינֵי הַצְּמָחִים הַמּוֹעִילִים תּוֹעֲלוֹת גְּדוֹלוֹת וְעָתִיד לְגַלּוֹתוֹ לִבְנֵי אָדָם וְיוֹרֵם דַּרְכּוֹ וְיִנְעֲמוּ בּוֹ בִּימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ אוֹ.
And from the kinds of plants that are beneficial, great benefits, and it is destined to be revealed to the sons of men, and they will be shown its way and they will delight in it in the days of the Messiah, or.

בִּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים בַּגּוּף כְּמוֹ בָּעוֹלָם הַזֶּה וְתַעֲנוּגָיו בְּמַאֲכָל וּשְׁתִיָּה וּרְחִיצָה וְזֶה אֵינוֹ תַּכְלִית הַגְּמוּל כְּמוֹ שֶׁבֵּאֵר
In the resurrection of the dead in the body like in this world and its pleasures in food and drink and bathing, and this is not the goal of reward as he explained.

הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה אֲבָל הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת הוּא וְהוּא טַבְעוֹ וּמִנְהָגוֹ שֶׁלָּעוֹלָם כְּלוֹמַר קִיּוּם הַנֶּפֶשׁ.
The rabbi, may his memory be blessed, but the next world is the world of souls, and it is its nature and custom of the world, i.e., the existence of the soul.

וְהַתְּמִיהָה מִזֶּה מֵאַחַר שֶׁהוּא מַאֲמִין שֶׁהָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הוּא הַהוֹוֶה לָאָדָם אַחַר הַמָּוֶת מִיָּד מָה צֹרֶךְ אֵלָיו
And the wonder from this, after he believes that the world to come is the present for a person after death, immediately what need is there for it?

לְרָאִיּוֹת וְהַכְרָעוֹת שֶׁאֵין בְּאוֹתוֹ הָעוֹלָם גּוּף אֶלָּא נְשָׁמוֹת בִּלְבַד תַּלְמִיד קָטָן שֶׁבְּיִשְׂרָאֵל יוֹדֵעַ כְּשֶׁהַצַּדִּיק נִפְטָר נַפְשׁוֹ
For proofs and decisions that there is no body in that world but only souls; a small student in Israel knows that when the righteous person passes away, his soul.

תְּלִין בְּטוּבַת הָעוֹלָם הָעֶלְיוֹן בְּלֹא גֶּשֶׁם וְגוּף כְּלָל וְאֵין טוּבָתוֹ בְּאָכִילָה וּשְׁתִיָּה וְסִיכָה וְתַשְׁמִישׁ שֶׁאֵין הַנֶּפֶשׁ
They are sustained in the goodness of the upper world without rain and body at all, and his goodness is not in eating, drinking, anointing, or intercourse, because the soul does not have these.

בַּעֲלַת הַנְּאוֹת הַלָּלוּ אֶלָּא בְּזִיו הַשְּׁכִינָה הִיא מִתְקַיֶּמֶת כְּעִנְיָן שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר "וְלָךְ לְפָנֶיךָ צִדְקָךְ כְּבוֹד ה' יַאַסְפֶךָ".
The owner of these pleasures is sustained by the glory of the Shekhinah, as in the matter that is said: "And your righteousness will go before you, the glory of the Lord will gather you."

והדברים הללו אף על פי שאין דרך סודם ידוע אלא ליחידים ואין משיג אותם על אמתת


מָה שֶׁהֵם אֶלָּא אָדוֹן הַכֹּל יִתְבָּרֵךְ דַּרְכֵיהֶם פְּשׁוּטִים לַכֹּל וְלָמָּה הֻצְרַךְ הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה לְמָה שֶׁכָּתַב
What they are, but the Master of all, may He be blessed, their ways are simple for all, and why did the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, need what he wrote?

בְּמִגְלַת תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים אֲבָל הַחַיִּים שֶׁאֵין אַחֲרֵיהֶם מָוֶת הוּא חַיֵּי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא בְּעִבּוּר שֶׁאֵין בּוֹ גּוּף
In the scroll of the resurrection of the dead, but the life that has no death after it is the life of the world to come, because there is no body in it.

כִּי אָנוּ מַאֲמִינִים כִּי בְּנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא נְפָשׁוֹת בְּלֹא גּוּפוֹת כְּמוֹ הַמַּלְאָכִים וְהָרְאָיָה עַל זֶה כִּי
Because we believe that the children of the world to come are souls without bodies, like the angels, and the proof of this is because.

הַגּוּף הוּא מְחֻבָּר מִכְּלֵי הַשִּׁמּוּשׁ לִפְעֻלּוֹת הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְהַגּוּף בְּכֻלּוֹ צֹרֶךְ מְצִיאוּתוֹ הָיָה בַּעֲבוּר תַּכְלִית אַחַת רוֹצֶה
The body is connected from the instruments of use to the actions of the soul and the body; the need for its existence was for one purpose, wanting.

לֹמַר אֲכִילַת מָזוֹן כְּדֵי לְקַיֵּם הַגּוּף וּלְהוֹלִיד דְּמִיּוֹנוֹ לְמַעַן יִתְקַיֵּם הַמִּין וְכֶשֶׁתִּסְתַּלֵּק הַתַּכְלִית הַהִיא וְלֹא יִהְיֶה
To say that eating food is to sustain the body and to reproduce its kind so that the species will be sustained, and when that purpose is removed and there will not be...

צָרִיךְ אֵלָיו בָּעוֹלָם הַבָּא כְּמוֹ שֶׁאָמְרוּ הַחֲכָמִים בְּבֵאוּר שֶׁאֵין בּוֹ לֹא אֲכִילָה וּשְׁתִיָּה וְלֹא תַּשְׁמִישׁ אִם
He needs it in the world to come, as the sages explained in their interpretation that there is no eating and drinking or sexual intercourse there, if.

כן הם רוצים לומר כי אין בו גוף כי האל יתברך לא ימציא דבר ריק ולא


יַעֲשֶׂה דָּבָר אֶלָּא בִּגְלַל דָּבָר וְחַלִּילָה מִהְיוֹת פְּעֻלָּיו כִּפְעֻלַּת עוֹבְדֵי הָאֱלִילִים אֲשֶׁר עֵינַיִם לָהֶם וְלֹא יִרְאוּ
He will do a thing but because of a thing, and it is forbidden for his actions to be like the actions of the idol worshippers who have eyes but do not see.

אָזְנַיִם לָהֶם וְלֹא יִשְׁמְעוּ, כֵּן הַבּוֹרֵא בְּעֵינֵי אֵלֶּה הַחוֹשְׁבִים כִּי יִבְרָא אֵיבָרִים לֹא לַעֲסֹק בָּהֶם וְאוּלַי
They have ears but do not hear. So the Creator is in the eyes of those who think that He creates limbs not to use them, and perhaps.

בְּנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא בְּעֵינֵי אֵלֶּה הַחוֹשְׁבִים אֵינָם בַּעֲלֵי אֵיבָרִים כִּי אִם גּוּפִים וְאוּלַי הֵם עִגּוּלִים אוֹ
The children of the next world in the eyes of those who think are not those with limbs but bodies, and perhaps they are round or.

עֲמוּדִים אוֹ קוֹמוֹת מְרֻבָּעוֹת אֵין אֵלֶּה הַסְּכָלִים כִּי אִם שְׁחוֹק לְכׇל הָעַמִּים מִי יִתֵּן הַחֶרֶשׁ יַחְרִישׁוּן
Pillars or square floors are not these fools, but rather a joke for all peoples. Who would give the mute to silence them?

וַתְּהִי לָהֶם לְחׇכְמָה כׇּל אֵלֶּה דִּבְרֵי הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה וְעוֹד נוֹסַף עֲלֵיהֶם דְּבָרִים רַבִּים וְעַכְשָׁו נִתְמַהּ.
And it became for them wisdom all these words of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, and still more added to them many words, and now we are amazed.

עָלָיו אַחֲרֵי שֶׁהוּא יַאֲמִין בְּפֵרוּשׁ הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא עוֹלָם לַנְּפָשׁוֹת אַחֲרֵי מִיתַת הַגּוּפוֹת מָה צֹרֶךְ לְהַכְרָעוֹת
About him after he believes in the explanation of the World to Come that it is a world for souls after the death of bodies, what need is there for decisions?

הָאֵלֶּה הֲלֹא דָּבָר יָדוּעַ לַכֹּל וּמְפֻרְסָם הוּא שֶׁכְּבָר נִתְעַרְטְלוּ הַנְּפָשׁוֹת מִן הַגּוּף הַמֵּת וְהִנִּיחוּהוּ לְרִקְבוֹן וְהַכָּתוּב
Is it not known and famous that the souls have already been stripped from the dead body and left it to rot, and the scripture?

מֵעִיד "וְיָשׁוּב הָעָפָר עַל הָאָרֶץ כְּשֶׁהָיָה וְהָרוּחַ תָּשׁוּב אֶל הָאֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר נָתְנָה"
He testifies: "The dust will return to the earth as it was, and the spirit will return to God who gave it."

אֲבָל יִרְאֶה מְכוֹנַת הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה שֶׁהָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אִצְלוֹ מְשַׁמֵּשׁ לְכׇל עוֹלְמֵי הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וּלְכׇל הַמַּגִּיעַ אֲלֵיהֶן
But it will be seen from the system of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, that the World to Come serves for all the worlds of souls and for all that reaches them.

לְעֵדִי עַד וְהִנֵּה יַאֲמִין בֶּאֱמֶת שֶׁתְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים שֶׁהוּא עִקָּר מֵעִקָּרֵי הַתּוֹרָה הַכַּוָּנָה בּוֹ שֶׁתָּשׁוּב הַנֶּפֶשׁ לַגּוּף
For my witness, indeed, and behold he truly believes in the resurrection of the dead, which is a fundamental principle of the Torah; the intention in it is that the soul will return to the body.

בְּרָצוֹן הַבּוֹרֵא וְיֵצְאוּ הַנְּשָׁמוֹת מִן הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְיָשׁוּבוּ לַגּוּף בִּימֵי תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וְיִתְעַדְּנוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים הָהֵם הַזּוֹכִים
By the will of the Creator, the souls will leave the World to Come and return to their bodies in the days of the resurrection of the dead, and those people who are worthy will be rewarded.

בְּטוּבַת הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה בִּימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ וְיִזְכּוּ בּוֹ לְמַעְלָה עֶלְיוֹנָה מִמַּעֲלָתָם הָרִאשׁוֹנָה אֲבָל אַחֲרֵי כֵּן יִגְזוֹר הָרַב
In the goodness of this world in the days of the Messiah and they will merit in it a higher level than their first level, but after that the rabbi will decree.

זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה מִיתָה עַל הַמָּשִׁיחַ וְעַל דּוֹרוֹ וְיִהְיוּ נַפְשׁוֹתֵיהֶן בְּטוּב הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא בְּלֹא גּוּף כְּמוֹ שֶׁהָיוּ
May his memory be blessed, death on the Messiah and on his generation, and may their souls be in the good of the next world without a body as they were.

מִתְּחִלָּה בְּמַעֲלָה גְּדוֹלָה מִמֶּנָּה שֶׁזָּכוּ לָהּ בְּמִצְוֹת שֶׁעָשׂוּ בִּזְמַן הַתְּחִיָּה וְזֶה יִתְקַיֵּם לָהֶם לָנֶצַח.
From the beginning in a great rank above her that they merited in the commandments they performed at the time of the resurrection, and this will be established for them forever.

וְהִנֵּה אֲרִיכוּת הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה בְּהַרְבּוֹתוֹ דְּבָרִים לְהַכְרִיעַ שֶׁבְּנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֵינָם גּוּף לִשְׁנֵי עִנְיָנִים שֶׁהוּא
And behold the length of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, in his multiplying words to decide that the sons of the world to come are not a body for two matters which he is.

יוֹדֵעַ שֶׁאַנְשֵׁי קַבָּלָתֵנוּ יַאֲמִינוּ שֶׁאֵין אַחַר הַתְּחִיָּה מִיתָה עַל פִּי מָה שֶׁדָּרְשׁוּ בְּ"בָּלַע הַמָּוֶת לָנֶצַח" וְאָמְרוּ
Knowing that the people of our Kabbalah will believe that there is no death after the resurrection, based on what they derived from "Death is swallowed up forever" and said.

(סנהדרין צ"ב א') מֵתִים שֶׁעָתִיד הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא לְהַחְיוֹת שׁוּב אֵינָן חוֹזְרִין לְעַפְרָן וּלְזֶה הַדַּעַת בָּנִי
Dead people whom the Holy One, blessed be He, is destined to revive again do not return to their dust, and this is the opinion of my son.

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אַחֲרֵי הַתְּחִיָּה יִחְיוּ בָּעוֹלָם הַהוּא בְּגוּפוֹתָם וְהָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה מְבַטֵּל זֶה הַדַּעַת בְּכׇל יְכׇלְתּוֹ
The world to come after the resurrection they will live in that world in their bodies, and the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, rejects this opinion with all his strength.

וְעַל זֶה חָלְקוּ עָלָיו רַבִּים מֵחַכְמֵי הַדּוֹרוֹת הָאֵלֶּה עַל הַכַּוָּנָה הַזֹּאת כְּמוֹ שֶׁיִּמָּצֵא בְּדִבְרֵיהֶם כִּי עַל
And on this many of the sages of these generations disagreed with him about this intention, as can be found in their words, because ...

הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אַחֲרֵי הַמִּיתָה לִנְפָשׁוֹת לֹא יַחְלֹק כׇּל אִישׁ חָכָם אוֹ שֶׁאֵינוֹ חָכָם וְאֵין צֹרֶךְ בּוֹ
The world to come after death for souls will not divide any wise man or one who is not wise, and there is no need for it.

לְכׇל עִנְיָנֵי הַדְּבָרִים שֶׁכָּתַב הָרַב בְּכַמָּה מְקוֹמוֹת כִּי דָּבָר מְפֻרְסָם הוּא שֶׁאֵין לַגּוּף בּוֹ חֵלֶק וּזְכוּת
For all the matters of the things that the rabbi wrote in several places, because it is a well-known matter that the body has no share or merit in it.

וְעוֹד יְכַוֵּן הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה לְעִנְיָן שֵׁנִי לְהַחֲזִיק בַּנֶּפֶשׁ בְּעַצְמָהּ שֶׁאֵינָהּ גּוּף וְלֹא כּוֹחַ גּוּף אֶלָּא
And further, the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, will aim at a second matter: to hold fast to the soul in itself, which is not a body nor the power of a body, but rather.

שֶׁכֵּל נִבְדָּל כְּכַת הַמַּלְאָכִים וְכֵן אָמַר שָׁם בְּמִגְלַת תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וְהַגּוֹרֵם כׇּל זֶה מָה שֶׁיַּעֲלֶה בְּמַחְשָׁבָה
that an intellect is distinct like the host of angels, and so it is said there in the Scroll of the Resurrection of the Dead, and the cause of all this is what will rise in thought.

הַהֲמוֹן כִּי אֵינָם מַאֲמִינִים שֶׁיֵּשׁ מְצִיאוּת קַיֶּמֶת אֶלָּא גּוּף בִּלְבַד אַךְ מָה שֶׁאֵינוֹ גּוּף וְלֹא מִקְרֶה
The crowd because they do not believe that there is an existing reality except a body alone, but what is not a body and not a coincidence.

בְּגוּף אֵינוֹ נִמְצָא בְּדַעַת הַנִּבְעָרִים מִדַּעַת וְעַל כֵּן יַאֲמִינוּ רֻבָּם כִּי הַבּוֹרֵא יִתְבָּרֵךְ גּוּף כִּי אִם
In a body it is not found in the understanding of those who are ignorant of understanding, and therefore most of them will believe that the Creator, may He be blessed, is a body, unless.

אֵינוֹ גּוּף אֵינוֹ נִמְצָא לְפִי מַחְשַׁבְתָּם אַךְ הַנִּקְרָאִים חֲכָמִים בֶּאֱמֶת וְלֹא בְּמִלָּה עוֹבֶרֶת נוֹדַע לָהֶם בְּמוֹפֵת
It is not a body, it is not found according to their thought, but those who are called wise in truth and not in a passing word are known to them in a miracle.

כִּי כׇּל נִבְדָּל מִתּוֹלְדוֹת הַגּוּף הוּא יוֹתֵר קַיָּם בְּמַצִּיאוּתוֹ מִמִּי שֶׁיֵּשׁ לוֹ גּוּף וְעוֹד כִּי לֹא
Because every being separated from the generations of the body is more existent in its existence than one who has a body, and also because not ...

נָכוֹן לוֹמַר יוֹתֵר קַיָּם אֶלָּא שֶׁמְּצִיאוּתוֹ הַנִּבְדָּל הוּא מְצִיאוּת הָאֲמִתִּית בַּעֲבוּר שֶׁלֹּא יַשִּׂיגוּהוּ דָּבָר הַמִּקְרֶה הַשִּׁנּוּיִים
It is correct to say that it is more existent, except that its separate existence is the true existence because the thing of chance does not reach it.

וְהֵם הַחֲכָמִים שֶׁהִתְבַּאֵר לָהֶם בְּמוֹפֵת כִּי הַבּוֹרֵא אֵינוֹ גּוּף וְעַל כֵּן מְצִיאוּתוֹ בְּתַכְלִית הַקִּיּוּם וְכֵן כֹּל
And they are the sages to whom it was made clear by proof that the Creator is not a body, and therefore His existence is in the ultimate of existence, and so is all.

נִבְרָא נִבְדָּל רוֹצֶה לוֹמַר הַמַּלְאָכִים וְהַשֵּׂכֶל הוּא בְּמַצִּיאוּתוֹ יוֹתֵר תַּקִּיף וְקַיָּם מִכֹּל בַּעַל גּוּף וְעַל כֵּן
A created being, separated, wants to say that the angels and intellect are in their existence stronger and more enduring than any corporeal being, and therefore.

נֹאמִין כִּי הַמַּלְאָכִים אֵינָם גּוּפִים וְכִי בְּנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הֵם נְפָשׁוֹת נִבְדָּלוֹת וְעוֹד אָמַר זָכַר צַדִּיק
We believe that angels are not bodies and that the people of the world to come are separate souls, and further, the righteous one said.

לְבִרְכָה וְאֵיךְ יַעֲלֶה עַל לֵב אִישׁ שֶׁיְּבִינוּ אֵלֶּה הַסְּכָלִים כִּי הַמַּלְאָכִים נִבְדָּלִים מִן הַגּוּף וְעֶצֶם מְצִיאוּתָם
For blessing, and how will it come to the mind of a man that these fools will understand that the angels are separated from the body and the very existence of them?

רָצָה לוֹמַר מְצִיאוּת הַמַּלְאָכִים וּבְנֵי הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא יַחְשְׁבוּ אֵלֶּה כִּי לֹא יָדַע מְצִיאוּתָם אֶלָּא בְּקַבָּלָה מִצַּד
He wanted to say that the existence of angels and the sons of the world to come would be considered these, because he did not know their existence except through Kabbalah from his side.

הַתּוֹרָה וְכִי אֵין דֶּרֶךְ עִיּוּן מֵעִיד עַל מְצִיאוּת הַמַּלְאָכִים וְעַל קִיּוּם הַנְּפָשׁוֹת וְכוּ'
The Torah, and is there no way of contemplation that testifies to the existence of angels and the survival of souls, etc.

וְזוֹ הַמִּלָּה מוֹרָה לְךָ מִדִּבְרֵי הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה פֵּרוּשׁ הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא קִיּוּם הַנְּפָשׁוֹת בִּלְבַד אַחֲרֵי
And this word teaches you from the words of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, the explanation of the world to come, which is the existence of souls alone after.

הַמָּוֶת וְהוּא דָּבָר הַמִּתְבַּרֵּר לָהֶם בְּמוֹפֵת וְעִיּוּן בְּלֹא קַבָּלָה כִּי עִנְיַן הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אַחֲרֵי הַתְּחִיָּה בֶּאֱמֶת
Death, and it is a matter that is clarified to them through signs and examination without acceptance, because the matter of the world to come after the resurrection is truly so.

צָרִיךְ הוּא לִדְבָרֵי הַתּוֹרָה וּפֵרוּשׁ הַקַּבָּלָה.
He needs the words of the Torah and the interpretation of the Kabbalah.

וְהִנֵּה נִתְבָּרְרָה אֱמוּנַת הָרַב זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה בְּפֵרוּשׁ הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכַוָּנָתֵנוּ אֲנַחְנוּ בּוֹ וּבֶאֱמֶת תִּמְצָא לְמִקְצָת חֲכָמֵי
And behold, the faith of the rabbi, may his memory be blessed, was clarified in the explanation of the world to come, and our intention in it, and indeed you will find for some of the sages.

סְפָרַד בְּחִבּוּרֵי חׇכְמוֹתֵיהֶם וּבִתְפִלּוֹתֵיהֶם שֶׁהֵם מַסְכִּימִים לְדַעַת הַהוּא שֶׁהָעוֹלָם הַבָּא הוּא עוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת וְהַחֲכָם רַבִּי שְׁלֹמֹה
Spain in the compositions of their wisdom and prayers, which agree with the opinion that the world to come is the world of souls, and the wise Rabbi Solomon.

בֶּן גַּבִּירוֹל זֵכֶר צַדִּיק לִבְרָכָה אוֹמֵר בִּתְפִלָּתוֹ תַּחַת כִּסֵּא כְבוֹדְךָ מַעֲמָד לְנַפְשׁוֹת חֲסִידֶיךָ וּבוֹ נֹעַם בְּלִי
The memory of the righteous Ben-Gvir says in his prayer: 'Under the throne of Your glory, a place for the souls of Your pious ones, and in it there is sweetness without end.'

תַּכְלִית וְקֶצֶבָה וְהוּא הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן יִתְפַּלֵּל וּבְעֵת מִן הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה תּוֹצִיאֵנִי אֶל הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא בְּשָׁלוֹם
The end and the limit, and it is the world to come, and so he will pray, and at a time from this world, you will bring me out to the world to come in peace.

תְּבִיאֵנִי אֲבָל לָנוּ שׁוֹמְעִים שֶׁאָמַרְנוּ כַּהֲלָכָה וְהֵבֵאנוּ הַדְּבָרִים בִּרְאָיוֹת מִדִּבְרֵי רַבּוֹתֵינוּ זִכְרוֹנָם לִבְרָכָה וְשׁוּב מָצָאתִי לַגָּאוֹן
Bring me, but we hear that we said according to the law and we brought the matters with proofs from the words of our sages, may their memory be blessed, and again I found for the Gaon.

רַב סַעַדְיָה זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה בְּפֵרוּשׁ סֵפֶר דָּנִיאֵל שֶׁהוּא אוֹמֵר כְּדִבְרֵינוּ בְּפֵרוּשׁ הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא וְכֵן בִּתְפִלּוֹתָיו הוּא
Rabbi Saadiah, may his memory be blessed, in his commentary on the Book of Daniel, says as we say in the commentary on the world to come, and likewise in his prayers.

מִתְפַּלֵּל יַאֲמֵן וְיַגְדִּיל שִׁמְךָ עַד עוֹלָם וְקַבֵּץ נִדָּחֵינוּ וּלְבַנּוֹת בֵּית מִקְדָּשֵׁנוּ וּלְהַחְיוֹת אֶת מֵתֵינוּ וּלְהוֹצִיאָם בְּשָׁלוֹם
A praying person will believe and magnify your name forever, and gather our scattered ones, and rebuild our Temple, and revive our dead, and bring them out in peace.

מִמִּי הַיְּשׁוּעָה אֶל הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא אֲשֶׁר צָפַנְתָּ לָנוּ וְכׇל מַעֲשֵׂה בְּרֵאשִׁית יָכוֹן לְמוּלָנוּ וְגַם הַמָּכוֹן הֶחָדָשׁ
From whom is the salvation to the next world that you have hidden for us, and all the work of creation will be prepared for us, and also the new institute.

יִשְׂמַח לְנֶגֶדְנוּ זֹאת תְּפִלַּת הַגָּאוֹן זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה וְקַבָּלַת הָרִאשׁוֹנִים הוּא תּוֹרָתָם אַל תִּשְׁכַּח וּמִכׇּל מָקוֹם אֵין
May it please us that this is the prayer of the Gaon, may his memory be blessed, and the acceptance of the first ones; it is their Torah. Do not forget, and in any case, there is none.

בֵּינֵינוּ רַק בְּשִׁנּוּי הַשֵּׁמוֹת וְהַכֹּל מוֹדִים בִּתְחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים וּבְקִיּוּם הַזְּמַן הַהוּא בִּכְלָלָיו וּפִרְטָיו כְּמוֹ שֶׁפֵּרַשְׁתִּי זוּלָתִי
Between us, only in the change of names, and all agree on the resurrection of the dead and the existence of that time in its generalities and details, as I have explained, except me.

דַּעַת הָרַב רַבִּי מֹשֶׁה זִכְרוֹנוֹ לִבְרָכָה שׁוֹנֶתֶת קֶצֶבָה לִזְמַן הַתְּחִיָּה וּמַחְזִיר הַכֹּל לְעוֹלַם הַנְּשָׁמוֹת כְּמוֹ שֶׁנִּזְכַּר
The opinion of the rabbi, Rabbi Moshe, may his memory be blessed, which sets a limit for the time of resurrection and returns everything to the world of souls as it is mentioned.

לְמַעְלָה וַאֲנַחְנוּ מְקַיְּמִין אַנְשֵׁי הַתְּחִיָּה לְעֵדִי עַד מִיּוֹמֵי תְּחִיַּת הַמֵּתִים לָעוֹלָם הַבָּא שֶׁהוּא עוֹלָם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ אָרֹךְ
Upwards, and we maintain the people of the resurrection from the time of the resurrection of the dead to the world to come, which is a world that is entirely long.

וְאָדוֹן הָרַחֲמִים יְזַכֵּנוּ לַטּוֹב אֲשֶׁר צָפוּן לְיִרְאָיו וּפָעַל לַעֲבָדָיו לְמַעַן רַחֲמָיו וְחַסְדָּיו אָמֵן וְאָמֵן.
And the Master of Mercy will grant us the good that is hidden for those who fear Him and works for His servants for the sake of His mercy and kindness. Amen and Amen.
